---
title: "A multi-omics longitudinal study of the murine retinal response to chronic low-dose irradiation and simulated microgravity"
authors: ["Prachi Kothiyal", "Greg Eley", "Hari Ilangovan", "Katherine A Hoadley", "S Robin Elgart", "Xiao W Mao", "Parastou Eslami"]
journal: "Scientific Reports"
date: "2022 Oct 7"
doi: "10.1038/s41598-022-19360-9"
source_url: "https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9547011/"
---

# A multi-omics longitudinal study of the murine retinal response to chronic low-dose irradiation and simulated microgravity

*Scientific Reports*, 2022 Oct 7, [doi:10.1038/s41598-022-19360-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-19360-9)

### Prachi Kothiyal
### Greg Eley
### Hari Ilangovan
### Katherine A Hoadley
### S Robin Elgart
### Xiao W Mao
### Parastou Eslami

## Abstract

The space environment includes unique hazards like radiation and microgravity which can adversely affect biological systems. We assessed a multi-omics NASA GeneLab dataset where mice were hindlimb unloaded and/or gamma irradiated for 21 days followed by retinal analysis at 7 days, 1 month or 4 months post-exposure. We compared time-matched epigenomic and transcriptomic retinal profiles resulting in a total of 4178 differentially methylated loci or regions, and 457 differentially expressed genes. Highest correlation in methylation difference was seen across different conditions at the same time point. Nucleotide metabolism biological processes were enriched in all groups with activation at 1 month and suppression at 7 days and 4 months. Genes and processes related to Notch and Wnt signaling showed alterations 4 months post-exposure. A total of 23 genes showed significant changes in methylation and expression compared to unexposed controls, including genes involved in retinal function and inflammatory response. This multi-omics analysis interrogates the epigenomic and transcriptomic impacts of radiation and hindlimb unloading on the retina in isolation and in combination and highlights important molecular mechanisms at different post-exposure stages.

**Subject terms:** Retinal diseases, Epigenomics, Transcriptomics

## Introduction

Spaceflight hazards such as microgravity and space radiation are anticipated to impact biological systems and could potentially affect crew health and performance both in mission and once astronauts return to Earth. These unique hazards have been thought to induce adverse changes in the central nervous system (CNS), with a frequently reported impact on ocular function[1](#CR1)–[4](#CR4). Resources aboard space assets that have a sustained human presence like the International Space Station (ISS) are limited and it is difficult to recreate spaceflight conditions on the ground for controlled experiments. Therefore, characterization of the type and magnitude of these changes is challenging. Despite these challenges, analogs can be used to inform the understanding of the spaceflight environment impacts on biology and support development of mitigation strategies to reduce spaceflight health risks. Ground-based analogs can also support the interrogation of biological effects from disparate stressors in isolation from one another that cannot be untangled in the spaceflight environment. Furthermore, advances in bioinformatics have expanded the potential scientific return of prior experiments provided data is accessible for re-evaluation. Fortunately, NASA’s GeneLab is an open-access omics database for space-relevant biological experiments that provides access to uniformly formatted data[5](#CR5).

The current study leverages transcriptomic and methylation sequencing data acquired as part of a larger experiment to understand the longitudinal effects and underlying mechanisms of low-dose ionizing radiation (IR) exposure and hindlimb unloading (HLU; an analog for microgravity) on neurovascular oxidative stress and brain function[6](#CR6). Global transcriptome profiling with RNA-seq quantifies gene expression at the time of sample acquisition while reduced representation bisulfite sequencing (RRBS) analyzes DNA methylation, which is one of the most studied epigenetic modifications involved in disease development[7](#CR7)–[9](#CR9).

Previous studies analyzed spaceflight-induced transcriptomic and epigenomic response in murine retina[10](#CR10),[11](#CR11) or evaluated response to different ground-based hazard analogs in murine brain[6](#CR6) and spleen[12](#CR12). The spaceflight studies reported expression and methylation changes in genes known to be involved in visual perception, phototransduction, and macular degeneration pathways in murine models. However, these studies were performed in space where effects of both space radiation and microgravity on the retina were intertwined. In addition, these studies were performed 35–37 days after a spaceflight and there was no analysis done on longitudinal changes in the retina due to radiation or microgravity.

To our knowledge, the current analysis is the first multi-omics study of longitudinal changes in the murine retina due to microgravity, low-dose radiation, or combined exposure to both. We report differentially expressed genes (DEG), differentially methylated genes (DMG), and biological processes (BP) that are exclusive to, or shared across, multiple exposure conditions and post-exposure time points. We observed similar epigenetic and transcriptomic discordance in genes reported in the NASA Twins Study[13](#CR13) and in the retina of mice flown to space[11](#CR11), with some changes persistent even 4 months after exposure. This study provides an insight into the retinal response to exposures that are frequently used as analogs for individual spaceflight hazard and their interplay at different post-exposure stages, and contributes towards identifying key pathways to interrogate that may provide translational relevance across exposure types.

## Results

### Differential gene expression

Post-exposure timepoints had different global expression patterns that were visible in principal component analysis where samples clustered more closely based on time point/age of mice instead of the exposure condition (Supplementary Fig. [1](#MOESM1)A). For both gene expression and methylation, each experimental group (Supplementary Table [S1](#MOESM2)) was compared to a control group (no radiation or HLU) with matched post-exposure duration, and significant differential expression was identified in eight out of the nine comparisons (Table [1](#Tab1), Fig. [1](#Fig1)A,B). While the samples clustered by time point/age based on global gene expression, they could be separated by exposure condition within each time point when genes were selected based on differential expression (Supplementary Fig. [1](#MOESM1)B, Fig. [1](#Fig1)B).

#### Table 1.

Number of differentially expressed genes and differentially methylated genes across exposure groups.

|  | 7 days | 1 month | 4 months |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| DEG | DML/DMR | DEG | DML/DMR | DEG | DML/DMR |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| HLU | **71** | **743** | **7** | **716** | **4** | **134** |
| **↓** | 26 | 173 | 2 | 67 | 2 | 55 |
| **↑** | 45 | 570 | 5 | 649 | 2 | 79 |
| IR | **275** | **408** | **31** | **288** | **1** | **107** |
| **↓** | 142 | 147 | 15 | 30 | 0 | 42 |
| **↑** | 133 | 261 | 16 | 258 | 1 | 65 |
| HLU + IR | **0** | **374** | **64** | **957** | **4** | **451** |
| **↓** | 0 | 78 | 22 | 170 | 3 | 154 |
| **↑** | 0 | 296 | 42 | 787 | 1 | 297 |

DEG (|log2(fold-change)|≥ 0.263 and adjusted _p_\-value ≤ 0.05) and DMG (genes containing CpG loci or regions with |percent methylation difference|≥ 10 and adjusted _p_\-value ≤ 0.05) are listed in bold for each experimental group compared to its matched control. DEG counts are separated by down (**↓**) or up (**↑**) regulation; DML/DMR counts are separated by hypo (**↓**) or hyper (**↑**) methylation. _DEG_ differentially expressed genes, _DML_ differentially methylated loci, _DMR_ differentially methylated regions, _HLU_ hindlimb unloading, _IR_ irradiation.

The number of DEGs peaked at 7 days for groups exposed to only hindlimb unloading (HLU) or irradiation (IR) and showed a subsequent decline. The 275 DEG identified in 7-days IR were enriched in ocular disease terms (Supplementary Table [S2](#MOESM2)) whereas the 71 DEG identified in HLU alone had no significant enrichment of disease pathways. In the 1-month IR group, 7 out of the 31 DEG showed > twofold change (down-regulated: _Pon1, Sult1c1, Ermn, Stra6, Tmem72, Gm24514;_ up-regulated: _Bc1_). _Stra6_ and _Pon1_ are known to be involved in microphthalmia and diabetic retinopathy, respectively and _Bc1_ affects vascular development[14](#CR14) and structural plasticity[15](#CR15). _Prss56_, a gene implicated in human and murine refractive development and myopia[16](#CR16), was the only DEG at 4 months after exposure to IR alone.

The highest number of DEG within HLU + IR (combination of hindlimb unloading and irradiation) was detected at 1 month post-exposure with no DEG at 7 days. The 64 DEG at 1 month included 20 genes with enrichment (adjusted _p_\-value 8.24e-08) in the _somatodendritic compartment_ of the neuron where synaptic inputs are received and integrated, and 15 genes known to be targets of _mmu-miR-466_, a miRNA that regulates age-related macular degeneration (AMD)[17](#CR17) (Supplementary Table [S3](#MOESM2)).

#### Overlapping differentially expressed genes across exposure groups

Nine DEG were common between the HLU-only and IR-only groups at 7 days (down-regulated: _Arl2bp, Chrna6, Egln1, Map2k1__, Stmn2_; up-regulated: _Ccn2, Mbd6, Sox9, St6galnac2, Zfp36l1_) (Fig. [1](#Fig1)C). _Bc1_ and _Pgk1_ were significantly up-regulated in all exposure groups at 1 month. Zinc finger protein _Zc3h11a_ was significantly down-regulated in the HLU only group at 7 days but up-regulated at 1 month. _Zc3h11a_ expression has been shown to be altered in the murine retina and sclera in an experimental myopia mouse model[18](#CR18). Only a single common DEG was observed between the HLU + IR and HLU groups at 4 months (_mt-Co2_; up-regulated). _mt-Co2_ is in the mitochondrial inner membrane and is an essential subunit of cytochrome c oxidase, the terminal component of the mitochondrial respiratory chain[19](#CR19). An integrated analysis of mammalian spaceflight data has reported the kidney to show an induction of _mt-Co2_[20](#CR20).

### Differential DNA methylation

The 1-month HLU + IR group showed the highest total number (957) of differentially methylated loci (DML) and regions (DMR) in known genes (Table [1](#Tab1), Fig. [2](#Fig2)A). In all exposure groups, hypermethylation was more frequent than hypomethylation. Among the hypermethylated loci, a higher proportion of methylation differences were associated with CpG shores than with islands except in all three exposures at 4 months (Fig. [2](#Fig2)A). Conversely, more hypomethylated loci overlapped with CpG islands than with shores in most of the groups except in all three groups at 7 days. The exposure groups at 4 months contained a higher proportion of total DML within CpG islands than shores compared to the other time points. Top 1% DML (roughly equivalent to methylation difference ≥ 20%; Supplementary Fig. [2](#MOESM1)) within CpG islands and exclusive to 4 months post-exposure were found in 17 genes across HLU (hypo: _Utp14a_; hyper: _Dlgap3_), IR (hypo: _Gm7855, Rtn4rl2_; hyper: _Maz, Shank3_), and HLU + IR (hypo: _Bag3_; hyper: _Aspdh, Map7d1__,_ _Map7d2__, Morc4, Pcdh1, Pdzd11, Pik3ap1, Rtn4rl2, Suv39h1, Xk_).

#### Correlation in methylation differences across exposure groups

Pairwise analysis of all methylated loci in genes were compared across our 9 exposure groups (Fig. [2](#Fig2)B). The highest correlation in methylation difference across different exposures was observed at the same post-exposure time point. Hypermethylation of _Bclaf3_ promoter was observed in four groups (~ 15% in 1m HLU, 4m IR and 4m HLU + IR, and 26% in 1m HLU + IR), and another CpG island in _Tmc8_ promoter was common across all three exposure groups at 7 days (10% hypermethylation). The top DMLs shared across all three exposures were in _Cav2_ at 7 days (30% hypermethylation), _Grip2_ at 1 month (20% hypermethylation), and _Sorbs2_ at 4 months (8% hypermethylation).

#### Overlapping differentially methylated genes across exposure groups

A number of genes containing DML or DMR were observed in multiple exposure groups and post-exposure time points (Fig. [2](#Fig2)C). _Bcl11b, Bclaf3, Gse1, Necab2, Plec_ and _Tafa5_ were each differentially methylated in five out of the nine groups. Six genes (_Adamts5, Gse1, Rbm15b, Fscn2, Satb1, Tenm3_) were shared across different time points after radiation exposure, with _Adamts5_ and _Fscn2_ promoters being hypermethylated even after 4 months of exposure to radiation alone. The promoter region of _Pcdh19,_ a protocadherin, was hypermethylated (> 20% methylation difference) at all three time points for HLU + IR and also in HLU alone at 7 days. _Bclaf3_ was hypermethylated in five groups (HLU at 7 days and 1 month, HLU + IR at 1 month and 4 months, and IR and 4 months), and CpG islands in _Hmgb3_ promoter were hypermethylated in HLU and HLU + IR at both, 7 days and 1 month.

### Biological processes affected by low-dose radiation and hindlimb unloading across multiple conditions and post-exposure time points

#### Shared and exclusive biological processes across exposures and time points based on differential expression

The top BP significantly enriched across all conditions 7 days after exposure included _morphogenesis of epithelium_, _ATP metabolism_, and _nucleotide metabolism_ (Fig. [3](#Fig3)A, Supplementary Table [S4](#MOESM2)). Processes related to _epithelial morphogenesis_ were activated in the exposure groups, whereas all other processes were suppressed across the three conditions. All shared processes were activated in the 1-month groups, with the exception of _axon guidance_ and _cell junction assembly_, which were suppressed in the radiation only group. Common processes in the 1-month groups were related to _amine transport_, _regulation of membrane potential_, _synaptic vesicle exocytosis_, and _neurotransmitter transport_. At 4 months post-exposure, the top processes shared across the three exposure conditions were suppressed. These included _lens development in camera-type eye, wound healing, angiogenesis,_ and _sulfur compound metabolic process_.

Processes that were significantly enriched at all post-exposure time points for a given exposure condition were evaluated (Fig. [3](#Fig3)B, Supplementary Table [S4](#MOESM2)). _Nucleotide metabolism_ was suppressed at 7 days and 4 months but activated at 1 month in mice subjected to microgravity alone, whereas _epithelial tube morphogenesis_ and _lens development_ were activated at 7 days but suppressed at all later time points, and _detection of light stimulus_ was suppressed at 7 days and subsequently activated at 1 month and 4 months. _Retina homeostasis_ was suppressed in the radiation only groups at 7 days and 1 month but activated at 4 months, _eye morphogenesis_ was activated at 7 days and suppressed subsequently, and _synaptic vesicle endocytosis_ was suppressed at 7 days but activated at all later time points. In the combination groups, _postsynapse assembly_ was activated at all time points, _nucleotide metabolism_ was activated only at 1 month, and _Rho signal transduction_ was activated at 7 days and 1 month followed by suppression at 4 months. _Nucleotide metabolism_ and related processes were significantly enriched in all nine groups with consistent activation at 1 month and suppression at 7 days and 4 months. _Pdk1_ was within the gene set for _nucleotide metabolism_ processes across all nine groups, and its expression was decreased at 7 days and 4 months but increased at 1 month in all exposure groups (Supplementary Fig. [3](#MOESM1)). _Pdk1_ is a kinase known to play a key role in regulation of glucose and fatty acid metabolism, and is involved in cellular response to hypoxia[21](#CR21).

As a complementary approach to examining shared processes, BP exclusive to each exposure condition (enriched in ≥ 2 post-exposure time points), or exclusive to each post-exposure time point were also examined (Table [2](#Tab2), Supplementary Table [S5](#MOESM2)). Processes related to microtubule dynamics were enriched exclusively in HLU alone. IR-specific BP included _DNA conformation changes_, _Golgi organization_, _protein-DNA complex assembly_, and _type I interferon response_. The BP activated exclusively in IR but not enriched in HLU + IR at 7 days included _response to wounding, innate immune response, regulation of interleukin-6 production, heart morphogenesis, lipid metabolism,_ and _epithelial cell proliferation_. The processes suppressed exclusively in IR were related to _telomere organization, DNA repair, ncRNA metabolism, detection of light stimulus,_ and _organelle localization by membrane tethering_. Lastly, BP exclusive to HLU + IR were _postsynaptic density organization_ and _regulation of AMPA receptors_. Each post-exposure time point was associated with distinct BP enriched across multiple conditions only at the given time point. At 7 days, BP related to _proteasomal protein catabolism_ were suppressed in all groups, and _mammary gland morphogenesis_ was activated in IR and HLU + IR. Oncogenesis in the retina and breast have been linked by the regulation of cyclin D1[22](#CR22); the gene encoding cyclin D1, _Ccnd1_, was significantly up-regulated 7 days after exposure to IR but was not differentially expressed at the later time points. _mRNA catabolic process_ (suppressed) and _ion transmembrane transport_ (activated) were among the BP exclusive to 1 month post-exposure. At 4 months, _glycerolipid metabolism_, _pigmentation_, and _brown fat cell differentiation_ were suppressed.

##### Table 2.

Representative biological processes enriched exclusively under each exposure condition or timepoint.

| Category | GO ID | GO biological process | Adjusted _p_\-value |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **Exposure** |
| HLU | GO:0099118 | Microtubule-based protein transport | 8.54E−04 |
| GO:0048872 | Homeostasis of number of cells | 1.49E−03 |
| GO:0005996 | Monosaccharide metabolic process | 3.03E−03 |
| GO:0030308 | Negative regulation of cell growth | 4.99E−03 |
| GO:1901653 | Cellular response to peptide | 9.58E−03 |
| IR | GO:0000209 | Protein polyubiquitination | 1.20E−05 |
| GO:0042147 | Retrograde transport, endosome to Golgi | 4.33E−04 |
| GO:0065004 | Protein-DNA complex assembly | 1.02E−03 |
| GO:0002067 | Glandular epithelial cell differentiation | 2.77E−03 |
| GO:0034340 | Response to type I interferon | 9.65E−03 |
| GO:0098801 | Regulation of renal system process | 1.56E−02 |
| HLU + IR | GO:0099084 | Postsynaptic specialization organization | 7.60E−05 |
| GO:2000311 | Regulation of AMPA receptor activity | 1.09E−04 |
| GO:0099565 | Chemical synaptic transmission, postsynaptic | 2.05E−04 |
| **Timepoint** |
| 7d | GO:0030879 | Mammary gland development | 7.12E−07 |
| GO:0022406 | Membrane docking | 2.05E−06 |
| GO:0061136 | Regulation of proteasomal protein catabolic process | 5.82E−06 |
| GO:0090174 | Organelle membrane fusion | 1.42E−04 |
| GO:0070972 | Protein localization to endoplasmic reticulum | 6.69E−04 |
| GO:0045747 | Positive regulation of Notch signaling pathway | 1.10E−03 |
| GO:0044706 | Multi-multicellular organism process | 1.63E−02 |
| GO:0045576 | Mast cell activation | 2.07E−02 |
| 1m | GO:0042391 | Regulation of membrane potential | 2.72E−21 |
| GO:0034765 | Regulation of ion transmembrane transport | 6.64E−17 |
| GO:0007626 | Locomotory behavior | 3.25E−12 |
| GO:0050806 | Positive regulation of synaptic transmission | 1.09E−10 |
| GO:0050770 | Regulation of axonogenesis | 2.84E−09 |
| GO:0006402 | mRNA catabolic process | 9.05E−08 |
| GO:0019233 | Sensory perception of pain | 1.61E−07 |
| GO:0048588 | Developmental cell growth | 3.42E−06 |
| GO:0010770 | Positive regulation of cell morphogenesis involved in differentiation | 7.78E−06 |
| GO:0043087 | Regulation of GTPase activity | 7.00E−05 |
| GO:0043279 | Response to alkaloid | 1.77E−04 |
| GO:1901214 | Regulation of neuron death | 2.30E−04 |
| GO:0002244 | Hematopoietic progenitor cell differentiation | 3.36E−03 |
| GO:0008037 | Cell recognition | 7.00E−03 |
| 4m | GO:1905521 | Regulation of macrophage migration | 1.81E−05 |
| GO:0043473 | Pigmentation | 2.35E−05 |
| GO:0046486 | Glycerolipid metabolic process | 3.66E−05 |
| GO:0031669 | Cellular response to nutrient levels | 7.95E−05 |
| GO:0050873 | Brown fat cell differentiation | 8.04E−04 |
| GO:1902229 | Regulation of intrinsic apoptotic signaling pathway in response to DNA damage | 6.45E−03 |
| GO:0055076 | Transition metal ion homeostasis | 6.67E−03 |

_REVIGO_ was used for reducing significant biological processes (adjusted _p_\-value ≤ 0.05) exclusive to each exposure condition (HLU, IR, HLU + IR) or timepoint (7d, 1m, 4m) to representative non-redundant terms.

#### Over-represented biological processes based on differential methylation

Over-representation analysis (ORA) was applied separately to hypo- and hypermethylated genes, and only the hypermethylated genes resulted in significantly over-represented processes (Supplementary Table [S6](#MOESM2)). ORA is conducted by iteratively counting the number of genes shared between a preselected input gene set (e.g., genes differentially methylated based on cutoffs for significance and magnitude of change) and each annotated gene set (e.g., all genes in a GO category), and applying a hypergeometric test to determine the statistical significance of the overlap[23](#CR23). Since all the groups showed differential methylation in a sizable set of genes compared to differential expression, ORA was suitable for methylation whereas gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was more appropriate for gene expression as it does not require an arbitrary cutoff for selecting significant genes. All genes overlapping with at least one covered CpG site were used as the gene background for ORA. Using a Benjamini–Hochberg adjusted _p_\-value of 0.05 as the cutoff, nine processes were enriched in 4-month HLU + IR and included _regulation of Wnt signaling_, _neurogenesis, nervous system development, cell projection organization, cell surface receptor signaling, pattern specification process_ and _morphogenesis of a polarized epithelium._ Genes with hypermethylation and involved in the regulation of these processes included oncogenes and tumor suppressors such as _Wnt3, Trp53, Trp73, Sox10, Rap1gap, Paqr3, Kit_ and _Bex1._ The promoter region of the brain expressed X-linked gene, _Bex1_, contained four hypermethylated sites overlapping a CpG island. The gene has been reported to show promoter hypermethylation in malignant glioma cell line specimens[24](#CR24). Analysis based on KEGG pathways also showed an enrichment for _Wnt signaling_ (raw and adjusted _p_\-value of 0.005 and 0.3, respectively). Only one other group, 1-month HLU, showed over-representation for a biological process at an adjusted _p_\-value cutoff of 0.05 (_actin filament-based process_).

### Integrated analysis of genes and biological processes impacted at transcriptomic and epigenomic levels

A total of 23 genes showed changes in expression and methylation at an adjusted _p_\-value cutoff of 0.05 (Table [3](#Tab3)). _Eef1a1_, a protein involved in peptide chain elongation, was down-regulated and hypomethylated in groups exposed to radiation or microgravity 7 days post-exposure. Crystallin _Crybb3_ and signal-induced proliferation-associated _Sipa1l3,_ both implicated in cataract, were up-regulated and hypermethylated 7 days after exposure to IR or HLU, respectively. Fibroblast growth factor 1 (_Fgfr1_) has been known to mediate photoreceptor rescue effect in response to retinal injury[25](#CR25), and the gene was up-regulated and hypomethylated 7 days after radiation. _Ncor2_, a gene in the Notch signaling pathway, was up-regulated with hypermethylation in the gene body in 7 days IR. Plectin _Plec_, a cytolinker protein involved in cytoskeletal organization, was up-regulated and hypermethylated. Filamin _Flnb_ was also up-regulated and hypermethylated and is known to be involved in microvascular development[26](#CR26). No common differentially expressed and methylated genes were found in any of the exposure groups at 4 months.

#### Table 3.

Genes with statistically significant expression and methylation changes.

| Group | Gene | Log2fold-change (adj. _p_\-value), % methylation difference (adj. _p_\-value) | Differential methylation genomic context (gene body vs. promoter) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 7d HLU | _Cdk14_ (cyclin dependant kinase) | − 0.24 (0.01), 2.81 (0.04) | Promoter |
| _Eef1a1_ (eukaryotic translation elongation factor) | − 0.23 (0.02), − 11.74 (0.03) | Promoter |
| _Fam222a_ (aggregatin) | 0.30 (0.004), − 6.76 (0.03) | Gene body |
| _Pitpnm3_ (membrane-associated phosphatidylinositol transfer domain-containing) | 0.20 (0.01), 9.90 (0.02) | Promoter |
| _Sipa1l3_ (signal induced proliferation associated) | 0.20 (0.02), 15.44 (0.009) | Gene body |
| _Sox9_ (SRY-box transcription factor) | 0.35 (0.004), − 5.74 (0.03) | Gene body |
| 7d IR | _[BC031181](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/BC031181)_ (cDNA sequence) | − 0.33 (0.04), 26.70 (0.03) | Promoter |
| _Crybb3_ (crystallin) | 3.47 (0.03), 16.40 (0.006) | Promoter |
| _Dcp1b_ (decapping mRNA) | 0.32 (0.03), − 11.22 (0.04) | Gene body |
| _Eef1a1_ (eukaryotic translation elongation factor) | − 0.25 (0.002), − 13.72 (0.0002) | Promoter |
| _Fgfr1_ (fibroblast growth factor receptor) | 0.61 (0.02), − 0.65 (0.02) | Promoter |
| _Flnb_ (filamin) | 0.38 (0.03), 11.11 (0.04) | Gene body |
| _Mbd6_ (methyl-CpG binding domain) | 0.31 (0.005), 8.96 (0.002) | Promoter |
| _Ncor2_ (nuclear receptor corepressor) | 0.29 (0.02), 20.20 (0.0003) | Gene body |
| _Plec_ (plectin) | 0.36 (0.02), 11.95 (0.0008) | Gene body |
| _Ppm1a_ (protein phosphatase) | − 0.22 (0.02), 0.79 (0.04) | Promoter |
| 1m HLU + IR | _B4galt6_ (membrane-bound glycoprotein) | 0.36 (0.0004), − 3.89 (0.02) | Promoter |
| _Kcnip3 (_potassium voltage-gated channel interacting) | 0.35 (0.02), − 14.28 (0.04) | Promoter |
| _Lamp5_ (lysosomal associated membrane protein) | 0.30 (0.03), 10.48 (0.03) | Promoter |
| _Nacad_ (NAC alpha domain containing) | 0.31 (0.003), 20.22 (0.03) | Gene body |
| _Rundc3a (_RUN domain containing) | 0.29 (0.01), 23.99 (0.04) | Promoter |
| _Sphkap (_SPHK1 interactor, AKAP domain containing) | 0.22 (0.02), 17.98 (0.04) | Promoter |
| _Tle3_ (transcriptional co-repressor) | 0.36 (0.0002), 7.30 (0.05) | Gene body |

Genes that are differentially expressed in a given group (adjusted _p_\-value ≤ 0.05) and also contain at least one differentially methylated locus or region (adjusted _p_\-value ≤ 0.05) are listed. Log2(fold-change) for expression difference, percentage methylation difference, and location of DML or DMR within gene context (promoter vs. gene body) are also included. Adjusted _p_\-values for expression and methylation differences are also provided. _HLU_ hindlimb unloading, _IR_ irradiation, _DML_ differentially methylated locus, _DMR_ differentially methylated region.

The biological processes and constituent genes shared within a given group with over-representation based on methylation data and enrichment in expression analysis were also obtained (Table [4](#Tab4), Supplementary Table [S7](#MOESM2)). The highest number of overlapping processes were observed in 4-months HLU + IR, with _Wnt signaling pathway_ being one of the shared BP. _Actin filament-based process_ was enriched in 1-month HLU and 4-months HLU + IR based on both, differential expression and methylation. Processes related to _ion transmembrane transport_ were activated in the 1-month HLU + IR group. Shared genes included ephrin _Ephb2_, which is also dysregulated in the murine brain following hindlimb unloading[6](#CR6). Calcium binding protein _Cabp1_ and calcium voltage-gated channel subunits _Cacna1c_ and _Cacna1h_ were among the genes involved in ion transport; another calcium voltage-gated channel subunit, _Cacna2d4_, was also impacted in the murine retina after spaceflight[10](#CR10).

#### Table 4.

GO biological processes and related genes common between RNA-Seq and methylation.

| Group (Total no. of BP) | GO Biological Process | Overlapping genes |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 7d\_HLU (9) | Multicellular organismal homeostasis | _Alox12b, Crtc1, Edn2, Epas1, Igf1r, Mbp, P2rx7, Stat3, Tmem119, Trim32_ |
| Trans-synaptic signaling | _Adcyap1, Atp2b2, Cacnb4, Chat, Itgb1, Itpka, Lrfn2, Rapgef2_ |
| Positive regulation of cold-induced thermogenesis | _Epas1, Igf1r_ |
| Anterograde trans-synaptic signaling | _Adcyap1, Atp2b2, Cacnb4, Chat, Itgb1, Itpka, Lrfn2, Rapgef2_ |
| Chemical synaptic transmission | _Adcyap1, Atp2b2, Cacnb4, Chat, Itgb1, Itpka, Lrfn2, Rapgef2_ |
| Cell junction assembly | _Fgf13, Nrxn1, Sdk2_ |
| Synaptic signaling | _Adcyap1, Atp2b2, Cabp1, Cacnb4, Chat, Itgb1, Itpka, Lrfn2, Rapgef2_ |
| Regulation of neurotransmitter levels | _Atp1a2, Cacnb4, Chat, Itgb1, Pebp1_ |
| Temperature homeostasis | _Edn2, Epas1, Igf1r, Stat3_ |
| 7d\_IR (17) | Cell morphogenesis involved in differentiation | _Cdh23, Cul7, Ephb2, Fgfr3, Flnb, Kif1a, Lamc1, Plxna1, Ptprs, Rreb1_ |
| Myotube differentiation | _Adamts15, Adamts5, Plec_ |
| Forebrain development | _Ephb2, Fgfr3, Kif1a, Ncor2, Ptprs_ |
| Cellular component morphogenesis | _Cul7, Dab2ip, Ephb2, Fgfr3, Kif1a, Plec, Plxna1, Ptprs, Rreb1_ |
| Cell part morphogenesis | _Cul7, Dab2ip, Ephb2, Fgfr3, Kif1a, Plec, Plxna1, Ptprs, Rreb1_ |
| Plasma membrane bounded cell projection morphogenesis | _Cul7, Dab2ip, Ephb2, Fgfr3, Kif1a, Plxna1, Ptprs, Rreb1_ |
| Cell projection morphogenesis | _Cul7, Dab2ip, Ephb2, Fgfr3, Kif1a, Plxna1, Ptprs, Rreb1_ |
| Myoblast fusion | _Adamts15, Adamts5_ |
| Telencephalon development | _Ephb2, Ncor2, Ptprs_ |
| Cell–cell fusion | _Adamts15, Adamts5, Sh3pxd2a_ |
| 1m\_HLU (8) | Negative regulation of cell differentiation | _Hmgb3, Mbnl3, Nfatc2, Nr1d1, Prdm16, Zfpm1_ |
| Actin cytoskeleton organization | _Ablim2, Cd2ap, Csrp2, Fhod3, Fmnl3, Foxj1, Frmd6, Iqgap3, Myo15, Myo18a, Myo1h, Pacsin1, Pakap, Plec, Rapgef3, Rhobtb1_ |
| Actin filament-based process | _Ablim2, Atp1a1, Cacna1d, Cd2ap, Csrp2, Fhod3, Fmnl3, Foxj1, Frmd6, Iqgap3, Myo15, Myo18a, Myo1h, Pacsin1, Pakap, Pde4d, Plec, Rapgef3, Rhobtb1_ |
| Actomyosin structure organization | _Csrp2, Fhod3, Frmd6, Myo18a, Plec, Rapgef3_ |
| Regulation of cell shape | _Fmnl3, Myo10, Pakap, Rhobtb1_ |
| Regulation of cell morphogenesis | _Bcl9l, Cpne5, Fmnl3, Myo10, Pakap, Rhobtb1, Rreb1_ |
| Regulation of glycolytic process | _Esrrb, Zbtb20_ |
| Regulation of nucleotide metabolic process | _Hpca, Prkag2_ |
| 1m\_HLU\_IR (5) | Cation transmembrane transport | _Akt1, Atp13a2, Cabp1, Cacna1c, Cacna1h, Cemip, Ephb2, Hcn3, Kcnc2, Kcnh1, Kcnn2, Nalf2, Nrxn1_ |
| Inorganic cation transmembrane transport | _Akt1, Cabp1, Cacna1c, Cacna1h, Cemip, Hcn3, Kcnc2, Kcnh1, Kcnn2, Nalf2_ |
| Regulation of ion transmembrane transport | _Akt1, Cabp1, Cacna1c, Cacna1h, Cemip, Ephb2, Hcn3, Kcnc2, Kcnh1, Kcnn2, Nrxn1_ |
| Cellular protein complex disassembly | _Apc2, Dmtn, Eml4, Nrg1, Nsf, Synj1_ |
| Cellular component disassembly | _Apc2, Atg2a, Dmtn, Eml4, Nrg1, Nsf, Ston1, Synj1, Vps13c_ |
| 4m\_HLU\_IR (52) | Actin filament-based process | _Cdh1, Lmod1, Plekhg2_ |
| Cellular response to growth factor stimulus | _Fgf5, Ntrk2, Prdm16_ |
| Morphogenesis of an epithelium | _Cdh1, Col5a1, Lama5, Notch2, Sox10, Wnt7b_ |
| Wnt signaling pathway | _Cdh1, Ptpru, Wnt7b_ |
| Collagen fibril organization | _Col5a1, Comp, Loxl1_ |
| Sensory organ morphogenesis | _Col5a1, Ntrk2_ |
| Cartilage development | _Comp, Wnt7b_ |
| Protein localization to plasma membrane | _Cdh1, Flot2, Lama5_ |
| Neuron projection guidance | _Lama5, Wnt7b_ |

Top ten BP (or lower if there are < 10 processes) enriched in a given group based on both, differential expression and differential methylation, are listed. The total number of BP for each group, and constituent genes that overlap for a given BP are also included. Full list of BP, constituent genes, and associated methylation difference and fold change values are included in Supplementary Table [S7](#MOESM2). _BP_ biological process, _HLU_ hindlimb unloading, _IR_ irradiation.

## Discussion

Spaceflight is an environment to which Earth-based biological systems have not yet adapted. Changes in gravity as well as radiation exposure that differs from terrestrial radiation both in terms of intensity and type, are the two primary naturally occurring hazards the human body contends with during space travel. It is crucial to characterize the impacts of these hazards to ensure the crew and NASA as an agency are appropriately informed. While hazards will be experienced concurrently in spaceflight, important information about the potential interactions between hazards can reveal how impacts can be appropriately mitigated. Different countermeasure strategies will need to be employed if hazards modulate similar or divergent processes.

It is important to note the current study leverages data from a previously performed animal study where mice were exposed to gamma-rays and microgravity as analogs of space radiation and microgravity respectively. However, even with the inherent limitations of using analogs, the observed results still provide insights on processes related to retinal dysfunction due to individual and combined exposures, at different time points, allowing us to gain a preliminary understanding of longitudinal changes. Compared to expression results from other tissue types collected in accompanying studies, spleen data from 7 days post-exposure showed highest number of DEG in HLU alone[12](#CR12), brain data from 4 months had most DEGs in HLU + IR[6](#CR6), whereas the retina results presented here showed DEGs peaked in IR alone at 7 days, and HLU + IR at 1 month. Combined stressors can induce complex responses further regulated by factors such as radiation type, post-exposure duration, and tissue type. Given the conflicting results from various studies addressing synergies between microgravity and radiation and their impact on DNA damage repair and cellular repair[27](#CR27), further work is needed to understand their interplay.

Biological processes shared across, or exclusive to, exposure conditions and post-exposure stages were identified (Fig. [1](#Fig1), Table [2](#Tab2), Supplementary Table [S5](#MOESM2)), and _nucleotide metabolism_ was enriched in all the groups with activation at 1 month, suppression at 7 days and even lower at 4 months for all exposures. The suppression of nucleotide metabolism has been shown to play a role in the establishment and maintenance of the stable growth arrest of oncogene-induced senescence[28](#CR28). Further work is required to understand the mechanism behind the activation at 1 month with a return to being suppressed at 4 months, and the specific role of _Pdk1_ in process modulation.

Several genes known to be implicated in ocular diseases were found to be impacted at the transcriptomic and epigenomic levels. A subset of the 7-days radiation only DEG (_Cryaa, Cryba1, Cryba2, Cryba4, Crybb1, Crybb2, Crybb3, Crygs, Bsfp1_) were enriched in _nuclear and congenital cataracts_, however, these genes were not dysregulated at 1 month or 4 months. A key component of the MAP kinase signal transduction pathway, _Map2k1_, was down-regulated in the IR and HLU + IR groups at 7 days but up-regulated at 1 month; MAPK signaling has been shown to be involved in AMD pathogenesis[29](#CR29). _Bc1_, a non-coding RNA known to affect vascular development[14](#CR14) and structural plasticity[15](#CR15) was significantly up-regulated in all three exposures at 1 month. Four months after radiation, retention of hypermethylation was observed in genes involved in eye development and pathogenesis including _Myc_\-associated zinc-finger transcription factor _Maz_[30](#CR30)_,_ disintegrin _Adamts5_ involved in AMD_,_ and _Fscn2_ with a role in photoreceptor disk morphogenesis. Interestingly, _Adamts5_ was previously observed to be dysregulated in the murine retina after spaceflight[11](#CR11)_._ Additionally, early differential methylation (only at 7 days and 1 month) was observed in _Hmgb3,_ a member of the high-mobility group superfamily and a transcription factor known to be impacted by spaceflight[10](#CR10).

A total of 23 genes shared differential expression and methylation (Table [3](#Tab3)). Of these, 14 had differential methylation in the promoter region and 9 in the gene body with negative correlation between expression and methylation changes in 3 and 6 genes, respectively. The rest showed a positive correlation. Recent studies have expanded the understanding of effects of DNA methylation on gene expression, especially in cancers[31](#CR31)_._ Along with the traditional methylation-induced gene silencing, there have been patterns of consistently positive or negative correlations for all CpG sites associated with specific genes. More work is needed to understand the variation in the impact of DNA methylation on expression across different tissue and cell types, genes, and the location of CpG sites. High-mobility group containing _Sox9_ is known to be involved in retinogenesis[32](#CR32) and was up-regulated in 7-days HLU and IR groups, and hypomethylated in 7-days HLU. _Ppm1a_ has been shown to play a crucial role in the wound healing-inflammation-angiogenesis axis in mice[33](#CR33), and was down-regulated and hypermethylated 7 days after radiation but not later. _Sphk1_ plays a key role in the regulation of inflammatory responses[34](#CR34); _Sphkap_, a modulator of _Sphk1_, was up-regulated and hypermethylated in 1-month HLU + IR. The glycoprotein _B4galt6_ regulates astrocyte activation during CNS inflammation[35](#CR35) and was up-regulated and hypomethylated_._ Interestingly, _Sphk1_ and glycoproteins _B4galt2_ and _B4galt3_ were also up-regulated in 7 days HLU + IR based on spleen data from the same set of mice[12](#CR12). Transcriptional co-repressor _Tle3_, involved in Wnt and Notch signaling pathways, was up-regulated and hypermethylated in 1-month HLU + IR.

Biological processes related to _Wnt signaling pathway_ were significantly enriched in multiple groups based on differential expression, with activation in IR and HLU + IR at 7 days, and suppression in 1-month HLU and all three exposures at 4 months. _Wnt signaling pathway_ is critically involved in cell–cell communication and regulates tissue homeostasis[36](#CR36),[37](#CR37). Altered activities may promote tissue degeneration[38](#CR38). Wnt signaling plays a role in eye organogenesis[32](#CR32) and genes in the pathway have been reported to be impacted by spaceflight[11](#CR11). The pathway has also been shown to be affected by spaceflight in 3D-cultured neural stem cells[39](#CR39) and human cardiovascular progenitor cells[40](#CR40). _Bclaf3_ has been proposed to regulate proliferation/apoptosis by suppressing Wnt signaling in the mouse gastric epithelium[41](#CR41), and showed hypermethylation in the promoter within four of the groups including IR and HLU + IR at 4 months. Interestingly, genes involved in Wnt signaling also appeared as members in processes enriched in 4-months HLU + IR based on methylation data (_Wnt3, Wnt11, Wnt7b, Lrp6, Tnik;_ Supplementary Table [S6](#MOESM2)).

Among the BP shared between differential methylation and expression (Table [4](#Tab4)), pathways related to _Wnt signaling_ were also over-represented in 4-months HLU + IR. _Collagen fibril organization_ was over-represented with three overlapping constituent genes: _Col5a1_ encodes an alpha chain of type V collagen and the gene family forms a major component of the basement membrane of the corneal endothelium and related genes were altered in the mouse retina after spaceflight[11](#CR11), lysyl-oxidase like _Loxl1_ has been implicated in pseudoexfoliation syndrome which is a major cause of glaucoma and cardiovascular complications[42](#CR42), and _Comp_ plays a role in vascular wall remodeling[43](#CR43). _Actin filament-based process_ was enriched in 1-month HLU and 4-months HLU + IR. Some of the gene members based on differential methylation in 1-month HLU are also known to be involved in _signaling by Rho GTPases (Rhoc, Rhobtb1, Arhgef10l, Cyfip2, Fmnl3, Fgd1, Iqgap3;_ Supplementary Table [S6](#MOESM2))_._ Rho GTPases are key players in adaptation to microgravity and actin cytoskeleton dynamics in mammalian cells[44](#CR44),[45](#CR45). _Temperature homeostasis_ was enriched in 7-days HLU, and has been shown to be impacted by hindlimb suspension in a previous study where the authors noted that unloading prevented the mice from curling up at night to regulate body temperature[46](#CR46). This difference in temperature regulation between the control and experimental groups should be considered while designing unloading experiments and interpreting the results.

Interestingly, the NASA Twins Study reported _Notch3_ to show epigenetic discordance based on spaceflight blood samples[13](#CR13) and the gene was significantly up-regulated (twofold change) at 7 days post-irradiation in the mouse retina. _Rbx1_ and _Ncor2_, also in the Notch signaling pathway, showed 33% hypermethylation in 4-months HLU + IR, and up-regulation and hypermethylation 7 days post-irradiation, respectively. The NASA Twins Study also reports a decrease during flight in _leucine rich alpha-2-glycoprotein 1_, a protein involved in retinal vascular pathology. _Lrg1_ was down-regulated by more than fourfold (unadjusted _p_\-value = 0.006) in 1-month HLU and significantly hypermethylated (16.8% methylation difference) in 4-months HLU + IR.

This multi-omics murine analysis highlights changes in gene expression, DNA methylation, and regulation of biological processes exclusive to, or shared between, exposure groups at different timepoints. Furthermore, there were expressed genes and processes that only presented themselves at the 4-month time point, which may be indicative of a longer post-exposure duration to understand the effects of low-dose radiation and microgravity on the retina. Wnt signaling has been shown to be perturbed in the murine retina after spaceflight[11](#CR11) and our results show discordance in the pathway in the 4-months HLU + IR group based on changes in expression and methylation. _Notch3_ and _Lrg1_ showed discordance during flight in The NASA Twins Study blood samples[13](#CR13) and also exhibit differential patterns in the murine retina in the current study. Hence, despite limitations mentioned below, our study provides confidence that murine models can provide an understanding of molecular mechanisms and pathways contributing to ocular function as a response to analogs for spaceflight stressors.

Our study comes with limitations. First, the number of samples was limited with only a total of 59 mice. Therefore, each exposure group at each time point was limited to 3–6 mice, thus limiting power. A follow-up study with more animals should be conducted to confirm these observations. Second, the animals were radiated by low-dose gamma rays which do not represent space radiation. Ground-based low-dose gamma or x-ray radiation studies are often used to study the effect of space-relevant radiation exposures (in terms of total dose) on different tissues/systems[6](#CR6),[47](#CR47),[48](#CR48) as to inform future space radiation experiments and form an initial understanding of the impacts across radiation doses and types. However, further studies should be implemented with higher dose gamma radiation and GCR simulations to leverage a more realistic space radiation analog. Third, a key limitation of applying bulk RNA-Seq and RRBS to a complex tissue such as the retina with ~ 140 cell types[49](#CR49) is that the approach averages signals over heterogeneous cell types at different transcriptomic states. As a result, true perturbations in, or correlation between, expression and methylation in a small cell population can be obscured by aggregated profiles. Fourth, caution is needed while comparing results between this study and The NASA Twins Study as biospecimen type and analysis time points differ between studies, and correlating time points across species with such different lifespans is challenging. Therefore, it is important to note that this analysis with its limitations only provides a preliminary signal for further investigation into understanding the longitudinal effect of spacelight hazard analogs on retina.

Overall, the results of this study support the development of a more robust understanding of the longitudinal molecular mechanisms implicated in the murine retina response to low-dose gamma irradiation and simulated microgravity. Further investigation into the interplay between these mechanisms and validation of results in multiple models may provide insights into key pathways with translational potential across biological systems and exposure types as well as targets for mitigation strategies.

## Methods

### Experimental conditions

The original study was conducted at Loma Linda University following recommendations in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals[50](#CR50) and was approved on April 30, 2014, by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at Loma Linda University (Protocol number 8130028). A detailed description of the experimental setup has been published previously[51](#CR51). Briefly, a total of 59 six-month-old, female _C57BL/6 J_ mice were housed in cages of same dimensions and subjected to one of four experimental conditions: sham control with no radiation or unloading (N = 15), hindlimb unloading (N = 14), low-dose irradiation (N = 15), and a combination of hindlimb unloading and low-dose irradiation (N = 15) for 21 days (Supplementary Table [1](#MOESM2)). Hindlimb suspension was used to model the unloading, fluid shift, and physiological stress aspects of the microgravity component. Gamma radiation was delivered using 57Co plates placed underneath the cages and a dose rate of 0.01 cGy/h was used to deliver a total dose of 0.04 Gy over a period of 21 days to simulate a space radiation environment. For the combination group, mice were exposed to unloading and simultaneously irradiated by 57Co plate placed underneath the cages. Mice from each exposure condition were then allowed a post-exposure period of 7 days, 1 month, or 4 months, following which mice were euthanized and retinas were collected and frozen. RNA and DNA libraries were constructed and used for RNA-Seq and RRBS. The resulting data was deposited to GeneLab where RNA-seq output was processed per NASA GeneLab RNA-seq pipeline[52](#CR52), and RRBS results are available in the form of raw sequencing reads. Unnormalized RNA-seq counts and raw RRBS FastQ files were downloaded from GeneLab and used for the current analysis.

### Differential gene expression analysis

Unnormalized RNA-seq counts were downloaded from GeneLab. Out of a total of 59 samples (Supplementary Table [S1](#MOESM2)), three were excluded from expression analysis due to low RNA integrity number values or high ribosomal RNA contamination. These counts were generated with GeneLab RNA-seq consensus pipeline, which includes quality control, read trimming, mapping, and gene quantification steps. Full details of the pipeline including the parameters used for each individual tool have been previously published[52](#CR52). RNA-seq counts were subsequently analyzed with _DESeq2_ (v1.30.1)[53](#CR53) where counts were first normalized using the median-of-ratios method followed by differential gene expression analysis comparing each experimental group to the corresponding post-exposure time point-matched control group. Differentially expressed genes were determined using cutoffs of 0.263 and 0.05 for log2(fold-change) and Benjamini–Hochberg adjusted _p_\-value, respectively, to be consistent with analyses of brain and spleen tissues from the same set of mice[6](#CR6),[12](#CR12). R packages _ggplot2_[54](#CR54), _ComplexHeatmap_[55](#CR55) and _pheatmap_[56](#CR56) were used for visualization and generating heatmaps.

### Differential methylation analysis

Raw RRBS reads were downloaded from GeneLab and processed with nf-core/methylseq pipeline ([https://github.com/nf-core/methylseq](https://github.com/nf-core/methylseq); v1.6.1 accessed on June 23rd, 2021). In short, _FastQC_ ([http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc](http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc)) was used for running quality checks on reads, adapter sequences were trimmed using _Trim Galore! for Cutadapt_[57](#CR57) without the _–rrbs_ option as recommended for NuGEN RRBS Ovation kit, NuGEN’s diversity trimming script was run, and _Bismark_[58](#CR58) was used for alignment and methylation call extraction. Deduplication based on overlapping coordinates was skipped as it is not recommended for RRBS[59](#CR59). Two samples were excluded from methylation analysis due to GC content bias. Mean Phred quality score across each base position in the read was confirmed to be ≥ 20 (Supplementary Fig. [4](#MOESM1)), and _MethylKit_ (v1.16.1)[60](#CR60) was used for detection of differentially methylated loci with a cutoff of 0.05 and 10% for a sliding linear model adjusted _p_\-value[61](#CR61) and magnitude of methylation difference, respectively[11](#CR11). As a complementary approach, methylation differences were also calculated over 100-bp tiling windows to obtain differentially methylated regions[60](#CR60). Sites and regions were mapped to known genes (mm10 assembly) and known CpG islands using _genomation_[62](#CR62) and _GenomicRanges_[63](#CR63) packages. Promoter regions were defined as 2 kbp upstream and downstream of annotated transcription start sites. Differentially methylated genes were defined as genes containing at least one DML or DMR within their promoter region or gene body. For determination of overlap between differential expression and methylation, no thresholds for fold-change or methylation difference were used to allow for genes with modest, but still significant (adjusted _p_\-value ≤ 0.05), changes to be observed.

### Gene set enrichment and over-representation analyses

GSEA for gene expression and over-representation analysis for methylation were conducted with the _ClusterProfiler_ (v3.18,1) package[64](#CR64) against the biological process GO category using _gseGO_ and _enrichGO_ functions, and against KEGG pathways using _enrichKEGG_. Wald test statistics from _DESeq2_ differential gene expression analysis were used to rank genes for enrichment analysis. Appropriate background gene lists were created by selecting all genes expressed in the retina or covered by at least one CpG site (within ± 2 kb of the gene) for expression (GSEA) and methylation (ORA) data, respectively. A Benjamini–Hochberg adjusted _p_\-value cutoff of 0.05 was used for selecting enriched terms. _REVIGO_[65](#CR65) was used for reducing significant biological processes to a representative non-redundant set of terms. ORA was performed separately on hypo and hypermethylated genes to obtain significantly enriched GO biological processes (adjusted _p_\-value ≤ 0.05) based on differential methylation in each group. Following adjustments were made to GSEA and ORA to allow for the discovery of overlapping candidate processes and genes between expression and methylation that can be further validated: (a) differentially methylated genes were defined as genes with their promoter or gene body containing a DML (adjusted _p_\-value ≤ 0.05, |methylation difference|≥ 10%) or DMR (adjusted _p_\-value ≤ 0.05, |methylation difference|≥ 2%); regulated methylation targets are routinely clustered into short genomic regions[66](#CR66) and a lower threshold for methylation difference in DMR (2%) is recommended for enrichment analysis since perturbed processes can be a cumulative effect of multiple DMR with small effects[67](#CR67), and (b) an adjusted _p_\-value cutoff of 0.25 was used for detecting overlapping biological processes based on differential methylation and expression; GSEA guidelines recommend a 25% false discovery rate (FDR) for exploratory analyses as a more stringent threshold can exclude significant results even before they can be validated[68](#CR68). _Enrichr_[69](#CR69) and _ToppGene_[70](#CR70) were used for disease term and functional enrichment analysis.

## Supplementary Information

## Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank Dr. Brock J. Sishc and Dr. Janice A. Zawaski for insightful discussions and their input to the analysis plan and the interpretation of initial results, Dr. Newton Campbell for his help with the provisioning of computational resources and Mr. Nicholas Meyer for providing management resources for this project. The data used in this study has been generated as part of the work supported by NASA NRA NNX13AL97G (X.W.M.) and NASA Human Research Program Grant No. 80NSSC18K0310 (X.W.M.).

## Author contributions

S.R.E., P.K., G.E. and P.E. made substantial contributions to the conception or design of the work. P.K. and H.I. made substantial contributions to the acquisition of data from GeneLab and setting up the computational environment for the analysis. P.K. determined the analytical approach, performed bioinformatics analysis, and wrote the manuscript. X.W.M., P.K., K.A.H, S.R.E., G.E. and P.E. interpreted the results and edited the manuscript. All authors have reviewed and approved the submitted version.

## Data availability

Transcription profiling and methylation data were downloaded from NASA’s GeneLab platform ([https://genelab-data.ndc.nasa.gov/genelab/accession/GLDS-203/](https://genelab-data.ndc.nasa.gov/genelab/accession/GLDS-203/); version 6). All software packages are open source and have been cited in the Methods section.

## Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

## Footnotes

**Publisher's note**

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

## Supplementary Information

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41598-022-19360-9.

## References

*   1.Chylack LT, et al. NASA study of cataract in astronauts (NASCA): Report 1: Cross-sectional study of the relationship of exposure to space radiation and risk of lens opacity. Radiat. Res. 2009;172:10–20. doi: 10.1667/RR1580.1. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1667/RR1580.1)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19580503/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Res.&title=NASA%20study%20of%20cataract%20in%20astronauts%20\(NASCA\):%20Report%201:%20Cross-sectional%20study%20of%20the%20relationship%20of%20exposure%20to%20space%20radiation%20and%20risk%20of%20lens%20opacity&author=LT%20Chylack&volume=172&publication_year=2009&pages=10-20&pmid=19580503&doi=10.1667/RR1580.1&)\]
*   2.Jones JA, et al. Cataract formation mechanisms and risk in aviation and space crews. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 2007;78:A56–66. \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17511300/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Aviat.%20Space%20Environ.%20Med.&title=Cataract%20formation%20mechanisms%20and%20risk%20in%20aviation%20and%20space%20crews&author=JA%20Jones&volume=78&publication_year=2007&pages=A56-66&pmid=17511300&)\]
*   3.Mader TH, et al. Optic disc edema, globe flattening, choroidal folds, and hyperopic shifts observed in astronauts after long-duration space flight. Ophthalmology. 2011;118:2058–2069. doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2011.06.021. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ophtha.2011.06.021)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21849212/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Ophthalmology&title=Optic%20disc%20edema,%20globe%20flattening,%20choroidal%20folds,%20and%20hyperopic%20shifts%20observed%20in%20astronauts%20after%20long-duration%20space%20flight&author=TH%20Mader&volume=118&publication_year=2011&pages=2058-2069&pmid=21849212&doi=10.1016/j.ophtha.2011.06.021&)\]
*   4.Alperin N, Bagci AM. Spaceflight-induced visual impairment and globe deformations in astronauts are linked to orbital cerebrospinal fluid volume increase. Acta Neurochir. Suppl. 2018;126:215–219. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-65798-1\_44. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-65798-1_44)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29492564/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Acta%20Neurochir.%20Suppl.&title=Spaceflight-induced%20visual%20impairment%20and%20globe%20deformations%20in%20astronauts%20are%20linked%20to%20orbital%20cerebrospinal%20fluid%20volume%20increase&author=N%20Alperin&author=AM%20Bagci&volume=126&publication_year=2018&pages=215-219&pmid=29492564&doi=10.1007/978-3-319-65798-1_44&)\]
*   5.Berrios DC, Galazka J, Grigorev K, Gebre S, Costes SV. NASA GeneLab: Interfaces for the exploration of space omics data. Nucleic Acids Res. 2021;49:D1515–D1522. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa887. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkaa887)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7778922/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33080015/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nucleic%20Acids%20Res.&title=NASA%20GeneLab:%20Interfaces%20for%20the%20exploration%20of%20space%20omics%20data&author=DC%20Berrios&author=J%20Galazka&author=K%20Grigorev&author=S%20Gebre&author=SV%20Costes&volume=49&publication_year=2021&pages=D1515-D1522&pmid=33080015&doi=10.1093/nar/gkaa887&)\]
*   6.Overbey EG, et al. Mice exposed to combined chronic low-dose irradiation and modeled microgravity develop long-term neurological sequelae. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019;20:4094. doi: 10.3390/ijms20174094. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms20174094)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6747492/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31443374/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.%20J.%20Mol.%20Sci.&title=Mice%20exposed%20to%20combined%20chronic%20low-dose%20irradiation%20and%20modeled%20microgravity%20develop%20long-term%20neurological%20sequelae&author=EG%20Overbey&volume=20&publication_year=2019&pages=4094&pmid=31443374&doi=10.3390/ijms20174094&)\]
*   7.Li F, et al. Expression and methylation of DNA repair genes in lens epithelium cells of age-related cataract. Mutat. Res. 2014;766–767:31–36. doi: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2014.05.010. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2014.05.010)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25847269/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mutat.%20Res.&title=Expression%20and%20methylation%20of%20DNA%20repair%20genes%20in%20lens%20epithelium%20cells%20of%20age-related%20cataract&author=F%20Li&volume=766%E2%80%93767&publication_year=2014&pages=31-36&pmid=25847269&doi=10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2014.05.010&)\]
*   8.Liggett T, et al. Methylation patterns of cell-free plasma DNA in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis. J. Neurol. Sci. 2010;290:16–21. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.12.018. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jns.2009.12.018)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2815078/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20064646/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Neurol.%20Sci.&title=Methylation%20patterns%20of%20cell-free%20plasma%20DNA%20in%20relapsing-remitting%20multiple%20sclerosis&author=T%20Liggett&volume=290&publication_year=2010&pages=16-21&pmid=20064646&doi=10.1016/j.jns.2009.12.018&)\]
*   9.de Almeida BP, Apolónio JD, Binnie A, Castelo-Branco P. Roadmap of DNA methylation in breast cancer identifies novel prognostic biomarkers. BMC Cancer. 2019;19:219. doi: 10.1186/s12885-019-5403-0. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12885-019-5403-0)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6416975/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30866861/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=BMC%20Cancer&title=Roadmap%20of%20DNA%20methylation%20in%20breast%20cancer%20identifies%20novel%20prognostic%20biomarkers&author=BP%20de%20Almeida&author=JD%20Apol%C3%B3nio&author=A%20Binnie&author=P%20Castelo-Branco&volume=19&publication_year=2019&pages=219&pmid=30866861&doi=10.1186/s12885-019-5403-0&)\]
*   10.Overbey EG, et al. Spaceflight influences gene expression, photoreceptor integrity, and oxidative stress-related damage in the murine retina. Sci. Rep. 2019;9:13304. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-49453-x. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-49453-x)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6746706/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31527661/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Sci.%20Rep.&title=Spaceflight%20influences%20gene%20expression,%20photoreceptor%20integrity,%20and%20oxidative%20stress-related%20damage%20in%20the%20murine%20retina&author=EG%20Overbey&volume=9&publication_year=2019&pages=13304&pmid=31527661&doi=10.1038/s41598-019-49453-x&)\]
*   11.Chen Z, et al. Spaceflight decelerates the epigenetic clock orchestrated with a global alteration in DNA methylome and transcriptome in the mouse retina. Precis. Clin. Med. 2021;4:93–108. doi: 10.1093/pcmedi/pbab012. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/pcmedi/pbab012)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8220224/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34179686/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Precis.%20Clin.%20Med.&title=Spaceflight%20decelerates%20the%20epigenetic%20clock%20orchestrated%20with%20a%20global%20alteration%20in%20DNA%20methylome%20and%20transcriptome%20in%20the%20mouse%20retina&author=Z%20Chen&volume=4&publication_year=2021&pages=93-108&pmid=34179686&doi=10.1093/pcmedi/pbab012&)\]
*   12.Paul AM, et al. Immunological and hematological outcomes following protracted low dose/low dose rate ionizing radiation and simulated microgravity. Sci. Rep. 2021;11:11452. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-90439-5. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-90439-5)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8169688/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34075076/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Sci.%20Rep.&title=Immunological%20and%20hematological%20outcomes%20following%20protracted%20low%20dose/low%20dose%20rate%20ionizing%20radiation%20and%20simulated%20microgravity&author=AM%20Paul&volume=11&publication_year=2021&pages=11452&pmid=34075076&doi=10.1038/s41598-021-90439-5&)\]
*   13.Garrett-Bakelman FE, et al. The NASA Twins Study: A multidimensional analysis of a year-long human spaceflight. Science. 2019;364:eaau8650. doi: 10.1126/science.aau8650. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aau8650)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7580864/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30975860/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Science&title=The%20NASA%20Twins%20Study:%20A%20multidimensional%20analysis%20of%20a%20year-long%20human%20spaceflight&author=FE%20Garrett-Bakelman&volume=364&publication_year=2019&pages=eaau8650&pmid=30975860&doi=10.1126/science.aau8650&)\]
*   14.Wang Y-C, Chuang Y-H, Shao Q, Chen J-F, Chen S-Y. Brain cytoplasmic RNA 1 suppresses smooth muscle differentiation and vascular development in mice. J. Biol. Chem. 2018;293:5668–5678. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA117.001578. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA117.001578)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5900757/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29467228/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Biol.%20Chem.&title=Brain%20cytoplasmic%20RNA%201%20suppresses%20smooth%20muscle%20differentiation%20and%20vascular%20development%20in%20mice&author=Y-C%20Wang&author=Y-H%20Chuang&author=Q%20Shao&author=J-F%20Chen&author=S-Y%20Chen&volume=293&publication_year=2018&pages=5668-5678&pmid=29467228&doi=10.1074/jbc.RA117.001578&)\]
*   15.Chung A, Dahan N, Alarcon JM, Fenton AA. Effects of regulatory BC1 RNA deletion on synaptic plasticity, learning, and memory. Learn. Mem. 2017;24:646–649. doi: 10.1101/lm.045617.117. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/lm.045617.117)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5688958/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29142061/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Learn.%20Mem.&title=Effects%20of%20regulatory%20BC1%20RNA%20deletion%20on%20synaptic%20plasticity,%20learning,%20and%20memory&author=A%20Chung&author=N%20Dahan&author=JM%20Alarcon&author=AA%20Fenton&volume=24&publication_year=2017&pages=646-649&pmid=29142061&doi=10.1101/lm.045617.117&)\]
*   16.Paylakhi S, et al. Müller glia-derived PRSS56 is required to sustain ocular axial growth and prevent refractive error. PLOS Genet. 2018;14:e1007244. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1007244. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1007244)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5864079/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29529029/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLOS%20Genet.&title=M%C3%BCller%20glia-derived%20PRSS56%20is%20required%20to%20sustain%20ocular%20axial%20growth%20and%20prevent%20refractive%20error&author=S%20Paylakhi&volume=14&publication_year=2018&pages=e1007244&pmid=29529029&doi=10.1371/journal.pgen.1007244&)\]
*   17.Olivares AM, et al. Multimodal regulation orchestrates normal and complex disease states in the retina. Sci. Rep. 2017;7:690. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-00788-3. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-00788-3)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5429617/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28386079/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Sci.%20Rep.&title=Multimodal%20regulation%20orchestrates%20normal%20and%20complex%20disease%20states%20in%20the%20retina&author=AM%20Olivares&volume=7&publication_year=2017&pages=690&pmid=28386079&doi=10.1038/s41598-017-00788-3&)\]
*   18.Fan Q, et al. Genetic variants on chromosome 1q41 influence ocular axial length and high myopia. PLoS Genet. 2012;8:e1002753. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002753. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1002753)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3369958/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22685421/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20Genet.&title=Genetic%20variants%20on%20chromosome%201q41%20influence%20ocular%20axial%20length%20and%20high%20myopia&author=Q%20Fan&volume=8&publication_year=2012&pages=e1002753&pmid=22685421&doi=10.1371/journal.pgen.1002753&)\]
*   19.Alston CL, Rocha MC, Lax NZ, Turnbull DM, Taylor RW. The genetics and pathology of mitochondrial disease. J. Pathol. 2017;241:236–250. doi: 10.1002/path.4809. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/path.4809)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5215404/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27659608/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Pathol.&title=The%20genetics%20and%20pathology%20of%20mitochondrial%20disease&author=CL%20Alston&author=MC%20Rocha&author=NZ%20Lax&author=DM%20Turnbull&author=RW%20Taylor&volume=241&publication_year=2017&pages=236-250&pmid=27659608&doi=10.1002/path.4809&)\]
*   20.da Silveira WA, et al. Comprehensive multi-omics analysis reveals mitochondrial stress as a central biological hub for spaceflight impact. Cell. 2020;183:1185–1201.e20. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.11.002. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.11.002)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7870178/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33242417/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell&title=Comprehensive%20multi-omics%20analysis%20reveals%20mitochondrial%20stress%20as%20a%20central%20biological%20hub%20for%20spaceflight%20impact&author=WA%20da%20Silveira&volume=183&publication_year=2020&pages=1185-1201.e20&pmid=33242417&doi=10.1016/j.cell.2020.11.002&)\]
*   21.Stelzer G, et al. The GeneCards Suite: From gene data mining to disease genome sequence analyses. Curr. Protoc. Bioinforma. 2016;54:1301–13033. doi: 10.1002/cpbi.5. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/cpbi.5)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27322403/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr.%20Protoc.%20Bioinforma.&title=The%20GeneCards%20Suite:%20From%20gene%20data%20mining%20to%20disease%20genome%20sequence%20analyses&author=G%20Stelzer&volume=54&publication_year=2016&pages=1301-13033&pmid=27322403&doi=10.1002/cpbi.5&)\]
*   22.Sicinski P, et al. Cyclin D1 provides a link between development and oncogenesis in the retina and breast. Cell. 1995;82:621–630. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(95)90034-9. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674\(95\)90034-9)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7664341/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell&title=Cyclin%20D1%20provides%20a%20link%20between%20development%20and%20oncogenesis%20in%20the%20retina%20and%20breast&author=P%20Sicinski&volume=82&publication_year=1995&pages=621-630&pmid=7664341&doi=10.1016/0092-8674\(95\)90034-9&)\]
*   23.Huang DW, Sherman BT, Lempicki RA. Bioinformatics enrichment tools: Paths toward the comprehensive functional analysis of large gene lists. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009;37:1–13. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn923. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkn923)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2615629/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19033363/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nucleic%20Acids%20Res.&title=Bioinformatics%20enrichment%20tools:%20Paths%20toward%20the%20comprehensive%20functional%20analysis%20of%20large%20gene%20lists&author=DW%20Huang&author=BT%20Sherman&author=RA%20Lempicki&volume=37&publication_year=2009&pages=1-13&pmid=19033363&doi=10.1093/nar/gkn923&)\]
*   24.Foltz G, et al. Genome-Wide Analysis of Epigenetic Silencing Identifies BEX1 and BEX2 as Candidate Tumor Suppressor Genes in Malignant Glioma. Cancer Res. 2006;66:6665–6674. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-05-4453. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-05-4453)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16818640/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cancer%20Res.&title=Genome-Wide%20Analysis%20of%20Epigenetic%20Silencing%20Identifies%20BEX1%20and%20BEX2%20as%20Candidate%20Tumor%20Suppressor%20Genes%20in%20Malignant%20Glioma&author=G%20Foltz&volume=66&publication_year=2006&pages=6665-6674&pmid=16818640&doi=10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-05-4453&)\]
*   25.Ozaki S, Radeke MJ, Anderson DH. Rapid upregulation of fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (flg) by rat photoreceptor cells after injury. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2000;41:568–579. \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10670490/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Invest.%20Ophthalmol.%20Vis.%20Sci.&title=Rapid%20upregulation%20of%20fibroblast%20growth%20factor%20receptor%201%20\(flg\)%20by%20rat%20photoreceptor%20cells%20after%20injury&author=S%20Ozaki&author=MJ%20Radeke&author=DH%20Anderson&volume=41&publication_year=2000&pages=568-579&pmid=10670490&)\]
*   26.Zhou X, et al. Filamin B deficiency in mice results in skeletal malformations and impaired microvascular development. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2007;104:3919–3924. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0608360104. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0608360104)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1820684/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17360453/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc.%20Natl.%20Acad.%20Sci.&title=Filamin%20B%20deficiency%20in%20mice%20results%20in%20skeletal%20malformations%20and%20impaired%20microvascular%20development&author=X%20Zhou&volume=104&publication_year=2007&pages=3919-3924&pmid=17360453&doi=10.1073/pnas.0608360104&)\]
*   27.Moreno-Villanueva M, Wong M, Lu T, Zhang Y, Wu H. Interplay of space radiation and microgravity in DNA damage and DNA damage response. Npj Microgravity. 2017;3:1–8. doi: 10.1038/s41526-017-0019-7. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-017-0019-7)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5460239/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28649636/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Npj%20Microgravity&title=Interplay%20of%20space%20radiation%20and%20microgravity%20in%20DNA%20damage%20and%20DNA%20damage%20response&author=M%20Moreno-Villanueva&author=M%20Wong&author=T%20Lu&author=Y%20Zhang&author=H%20Wu&volume=3&publication_year=2017&pages=1-8&pmid=28649636&doi=10.1038/s41526-017-0019-7&)\]
*   28.Aird KM, et al. Suppression of nucleotide metabolism underlies the establishment and maintenance of oncogene-induced senescence. Cell Rep. 2013 doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.03.004. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2013.03.004)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3840499/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23562156/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell%20Rep.&title=Suppression%20of%20nucleotide%20metabolism%20underlies%20the%20establishment%20and%20maintenance%20of%20oncogene-induced%20senescence&author=KM%20Aird&publication_year=2013&pmid=23562156&doi=10.1016/j.celrep.2013.03.004&)\]
*   29.Kyosseva SV. Targeting MAPK signaling in age-related macular degeneration. Ophthalmol. Eye Dis. 2016;8:23–30. doi: 10.4137/OED.S32200. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.4137/OED.S32200)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4920203/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27385915/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Ophthalmol.%20Eye%20Dis.&title=Targeting%20MAPK%20signaling%20in%20age-related%20macular%20degeneration&author=SV%20Kyosseva&volume=8&publication_year=2016&pages=23-30&pmid=27385915&doi=10.4137/OED.S32200&)\]
*   30.Medina-Martinez O, et al. The transcription factor Maz is essential for normal eye development. Dis. Model. Mech. 2020;13:dmm044412. doi: 10.1242/dmm.044412. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1242/dmm.044412)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7449797/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32571845/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Dis.%20Model.%20Mech.&title=The%20transcription%20factor%20Maz%20is%20essential%20for%20normal%20eye%20development&author=O%20Medina-Martinez&volume=13&publication_year=2020&pages=dmm044412&pmid=32571845&doi=10.1242/dmm.044412&)\]
*   31.Spainhour JC, Lim HS, Yi SV, Qiu P. Correlation patterns between DNA methylation and gene expression in the cancer genome atlas. Cancer Inform. 2019;18:1176935119828776. doi: 10.1177/1176935119828776. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1177/1176935119828776)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6376553/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30792573/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cancer%20Inform.&title=Correlation%20patterns%20between%20DNA%20methylation%20and%20gene%20expression%20in%20the%20cancer%20genome%20atlas&author=JC%20Spainhour&author=HS%20Lim&author=SV%20Yi&author=P%20Qiu&volume=18&publication_year=2019&pages=1176935119828776&pmid=30792573&doi=10.1177/1176935119828776&)\]
*   32.Cvekl A, Mitton KP. Epigenetic regulatory mechanisms in vertebrate eye development and disease. Heredity. 2010;105:135–151. doi: 10.1038/hdy.2010.16. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/hdy.2010.16)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4228956/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20179734/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Heredity&title=Epigenetic%20regulatory%20mechanisms%20in%20vertebrate%20eye%20development%20and%20disease&author=A%20Cvekl&author=KP%20Mitton&volume=105&publication_year=2010&pages=135-151&pmid=20179734&doi=10.1038/hdy.2010.16&)\]
*   33.Dvashi Z, et al. Protein phosphatase magnesium dependent 1A governs the wound healing-inflammation-angiogenesis cross talk on injury. Am. J. Pathol. 2014;184:2936–2950. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2014.07.022. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajpath.2014.07.022)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25196308/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am.%20J.%20Pathol.&title=Protein%20phosphatase%20magnesium%20dependent%201A%20governs%20the%20wound%20healing-inflammation-angiogenesis%20cross%20talk%20on%20injury&author=Z%20Dvashi&volume=184&publication_year=2014&pages=2936-2950&pmid=25196308&doi=10.1016/j.ajpath.2014.07.022&)\]
*   34.Bu Y, Wu H, Deng R, Wang Y. Therapeutic potential of SphK1 inhibitors based on abnormal expression of sphk1 in inflammatory immune related-diseases. Front. Pharmacol. 2021;12:2872. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.733387. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3389/fphar.2021.733387)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8560647/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34737701/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Front.%20Pharmacol.&title=Therapeutic%20potential%20of%20SphK1%20inhibitors%20based%20on%20abnormal%20expression%20of%20sphk1%20in%20inflammatory%20immune%20related-diseases&author=Y%20Bu&author=H%20Wu&author=R%20Deng&author=Y%20Wang&volume=12&publication_year=2021&pages=2872&pmid=34737701&doi=10.3389/fphar.2021.733387&)\]
*   35.Mayo L, et al. B4GALT6 regulates astrocyte activation during CNS inflammation. Nat. Med. 2014;20:1147–1156. doi: 10.1038/nm.3681. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.3681)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4255949/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25216636/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat.%20Med.&title=B4GALT6%20regulates%20astrocyte%20activation%20during%20CNS%20inflammation&author=L%20Mayo&volume=20&publication_year=2014&pages=1147-1156&pmid=25216636&doi=10.1038/nm.3681&)\]
*   36.Duchartre Y, Kim Y-M, Kahn M. The Wnt signaling pathway in cancer. Crit. Rev. Oncol. Hematol. 2016;99:141–149. doi: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2015.12.005. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.critrevonc.2015.12.005)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5853106/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26775730/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Crit.%20Rev.%20Oncol.%20Hematol.&title=The%20Wnt%20signaling%20pathway%20in%20cancer&author=Y%20Duchartre&author=Y-M%20Kim&author=M%20Kahn&volume=99&publication_year=2016&pages=141-149&pmid=26775730&doi=10.1016/j.critrevonc.2015.12.005&)\]
*   37.Tran FH, Zheng JJ. Modulating the wnt signaling pathway with small molecules. Protein Sci. Publ. Protein Soc. 2017;26:650–661. doi: 10.1002/pro.3122. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/pro.3122)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5368067/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28120389/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Protein%20Sci.%20Publ.%20Protein%20Soc.&title=Modulating%20the%20wnt%20signaling%20pathway%20with%20small%20molecules&author=FH%20Tran&author=JJ%20Zheng&volume=26&publication_year=2017&pages=650-661&pmid=28120389&doi=10.1002/pro.3122&)\]
*   38.Logan CY, Nusse R. The Wnt signaling pathway in development and disease. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2004;20:781–810. doi: 10.1146/annurev.cellbio.20.010403.113126. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.cellbio.20.010403.113126)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15473860/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Annu.%20Rev.%20Cell%20Dev.%20Biol.&title=The%20Wnt%20signaling%20pathway%20in%20development%20and%20disease&author=CY%20Logan&author=R%20Nusse&volume=20&publication_year=2004&pages=781-810&pmid=15473860&doi=10.1146/annurev.cellbio.20.010403.113126&)\]
*   39.Cui Y, et al. Systematic analysis of mRNA and miRNA expression of 3D-cultured neural stem cells (NSCs) in spaceflight. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 2018;11:434. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2017.00434. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3389/fncel.2017.00434)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5768636/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29375320/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Front.%20Cell.%20Neurosci.&title=Systematic%20analysis%20of%20mRNA%20and%20miRNA%20expression%20of%203D-cultured%20neural%20stem%20cells%20\(NSCs\)%20in%20spaceflight&author=Y%20Cui&volume=11&publication_year=2018&pages=434&pmid=29375320&doi=10.3389/fncel.2017.00434&)\]
*   40.Camberos V, et al. The impact of spaceflight and microgravity on the human Islet-1+ cardiovascular progenitor cell transcriptome. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021;22:3577. doi: 10.3390/ijms22073577. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22073577)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8036947/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33808224/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.%20J.%20Mol.%20Sci.&title=The%20impact%20of%20spaceflight%20and%20microgravity%20on%20the%20human%20Islet-1+%20cardiovascular%20progenitor%20cell%20transcriptome&author=V%20Camberos&volume=22&publication_year=2021&pages=3577&pmid=33808224&doi=10.3390/ijms22073577&)\]
*   41.Murakami K, et al. A genome-scale CRISPR screen reveals factors regulating Wnt-dependent renewal of mouse gastric epithelial cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2021;118:e2016806118. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2016806118. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2016806118)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7848749/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33479180/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc.%20Natl.%20Acad.%20Sci.%20U.%20S.%20A.&title=A%20genome-scale%20CRISPR%20screen%20reveals%20factors%20regulating%20Wnt-dependent%20renewal%20of%20mouse%20gastric%20epithelial%20cells&author=K%20Murakami&volume=118&publication_year=2021&pages=e2016806118&pmid=33479180&doi=10.1073/pnas.2016806118&)\]
*   42.Pasutto F, et al. Pseudoexfoliation syndrome-associated genetic variants affect transcription factor binding and alternative splicing of LOXL1. Nat. Commun. 2017;8:15466. doi: 10.1038/ncomms15466. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms15466)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5457519/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28534485/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat.%20Commun.&title=Pseudoexfoliation%20syndrome-associated%20genetic%20variants%20affect%20transcription%20factor%20binding%20and%20alternative%20splicing%20of%20LOXL1&author=F%20Pasutto&volume=8&publication_year=2017&pages=15466&pmid=28534485&doi=10.1038/ncomms15466&)\]
*   43.Halper J, Kjaer M. Basic components of connective tissues and extracellular matrix: Elastin, fibrillin, fibulins, fibrinogen, fibronectin, laminin, tenascins and thrombospondins. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 2014;802:31–47. doi: 10.1007/978-94-007-7893-1\_3. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-7893-1_3)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24443019/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Adv.%20Exp.%20Med.%20Biol.&title=Basic%20components%20of%20connective%20tissues%20and%20extracellular%20matrix:%20Elastin,%20fibrillin,%20fibulins,%20fibrinogen,%20fibronectin,%20laminin,%20tenascins%20and%20thrombospondins&author=J%20Halper&author=M%20Kjaer&volume=802&publication_year=2014&pages=31-47&pmid=24443019&doi=10.1007/978-94-007-7893-1_3&)\]
*   44.Guignandon A, et al. Rac1 GTPase silencing counteracts microgravity-induced effects on osteoblastic cells. FASEB J. 2014;28:4077–4087. doi: 10.1096/fj.14-249714. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.14-249714)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5395736/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24903274/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=FASEB%20J.&title=Rac1%20GTPase%20silencing%20counteracts%20microgravity-induced%20effects%20on%20osteoblastic%20cells&author=A%20Guignandon&volume=28&publication_year=2014&pages=4077-4087&pmid=24903274&doi=10.1096/fj.14-249714&)\]
*   45.Louis F, Deroanne C, Nusgens B, Vico L, Guignandon A. RhoGTPases as key players in mammalian cell adaptation to microgravity. BioMed Res. Int. 2015;2015:747693. doi: 10.1155/2015/747693. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1155/2015/747693)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4310447/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25649831/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=BioMed%20Res.%20Int.&title=RhoGTPases%20as%20key%20players%20in%20mammalian%20cell%20adaptation%20to%20microgravity&author=F%20Louis&author=C%20Deroanne&author=B%20Nusgens&author=L%20Vico&author=A%20Guignandon&volume=2015&publication_year=2015&pages=747693&pmid=25649831&doi=10.1155/2015/747693&)\]
*   46.Farley A, et al. Unloading-induced cortical bone loss is exacerbated by low-dose irradiation during a simulated deep space exploration mission. Calcif. Tissue Int. 2020;107:170–179. doi: 10.1007/s00223-020-00708-0. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00223-020-00708-0)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32451574/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Calcif.%20Tissue%20Int.&title=Unloading-induced%20cortical%20bone%20loss%20is%20exacerbated%20by%20low-dose%20irradiation%20during%20a%20simulated%20deep%20space%20exploration%20mission&author=A%20Farley&volume=107&publication_year=2020&pages=170-179&pmid=32451574&doi=10.1007/s00223-020-00708-0&)\]
*   47.Paunesku T, Stevanović A, Popović J, Woloschak GE. Effects of low dose and low dose rate low linear energy transfer radiation on animals: Review of recent studies relevant for carcinogenesis. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 2021;97:757–768. doi: 10.1080/09553002.2020.1859155. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1080/09553002.2020.1859155)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9216178/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33289582/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.%20J.%20Radiat.%20Biol.&title=Effects%20of%20low%20dose%20and%20low%20dose%20rate%20low%20linear%20energy%20transfer%20radiation%20on%20animals:%20Review%20of%20recent%20studies%20relevant%20for%20carcinogenesis&author=T%20Paunesku&author=A%20Stevanovi%C4%87&author=J%20Popovi%C4%87&author=GE%20Woloschak&volume=97&publication_year=2021&pages=757-768&pmid=33289582&doi=10.1080/09553002.2020.1859155&)\]
*   48.Tang FR, Loke WK, Khoo BC. Low-dose or low-dose-rate ionizing radiation–induced bioeffects in animal models. J. Radiat. Res. (Tokyo) 2017;58:165–182. doi: 10.1093/jrr/rrw120. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/jrr/rrw120)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5439383/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28077626/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Radiat.%20Res.%20\(Tokyo\)&title=Low-dose%20or%20low-dose-rate%20ionizing%20radiation%E2%80%93induced%20bioeffects%20in%20animal%20models&author=FR%20Tang&author=WK%20Loke&author=BC%20Khoo&volume=58&publication_year=2017&pages=165-182&pmid=28077626&doi=10.1093/jrr/rrw120&)\]
*   49.Yan W, et al. Mouse retinal cell atlas: Molecular identification of over sixty amacrine cell types. J. Neurosci. 2020;40:5177–5195. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0471-20.2020. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0471-20.2020)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7329304/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32457074/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Neurosci.&title=Mouse%20retinal%20cell%20atlas:%20Molecular%20identification%20of%20over%20sixty%20amacrine%20cell%20types&author=W%20Yan&volume=40&publication_year=2020&pages=5177-5195&pmid=32457074&doi=10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0471-20.2020&)\]
*   50.Council, N. R. C. _Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals: Eighth Edition_. (2010). 10.17226/12910
*   51.Mao XW, et al. Simulated microgravity and low-dose/low-dose-rate radiation induces oxidative damage in the mouse brain. Radiat. Res. 2016;185:647–657. doi: 10.1667/RR14267.1. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1667/RR14267.1)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27243749/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Res.&title=Simulated%20microgravity%20and%20low-dose/low-dose-rate%20radiation%20induces%20oxidative%20damage%20in%20the%20mouse%20brain&author=XW%20Mao&volume=185&publication_year=2016&pages=647-657&pmid=27243749&doi=10.1667/RR14267.1&)\]
*   52.Overbey EG, et al. NASA GeneLab RNA-seq consensus pipeline: Standardized processing of short-read RNA-seq data. iScience. 2021;24:102361. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2021.102361. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2021.102361)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8044432/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33870146/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=iScience&title=NASA%20GeneLab%20RNA-seq%20consensus%20pipeline:%20Standardized%20processing%20of%20short-read%20RNA-seq%20data&author=EG%20Overbey&volume=24&publication_year=2021&pages=102361&pmid=33870146&doi=10.1016/j.isci.2021.102361&)\]
*   53.Love MI, Huber W, Anders S. Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 2014;15:550. doi: 10.1186/s13059-014-0550-8. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-014-0550-8)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4302049/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25516281/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genome%20Biol.&title=Moderated%20estimation%20of%20fold%20change%20and%20dispersion%20for%20RNA-seq%20data%20with%20DESeq2&author=MI%20Love&author=W%20Huber&author=S%20Anders&volume=15&publication_year=2014&pages=550&pmid=25516281&doi=10.1186/s13059-014-0550-8&)\]
*   54.Wickham H. ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis. Springer; 2016. \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=ggplot2:%20Elegant%20Graphics%20for%20Data%20Analysis&author=H%20Wickham&publication_year=2016&)\]
*   55.Gu Z, Eils R, Schlesner M. Complex heatmaps reveal patterns and correlations in multidimensional genomic data. Bioinforma. Oxf. Engl. 2016;32:2847–2849. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btw313. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btw313)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27207943/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bioinforma.%20Oxf.%20Engl.&title=Complex%20heatmaps%20reveal%20patterns%20and%20correlations%20in%20multidimensional%20genomic%20data&author=Z%20Gu&author=R%20Eils&author=M%20Schlesner&volume=32&publication_year=2016&pages=2847-2849&pmid=27207943&doi=10.1093/bioinformatics/btw313&)\]
*   56.Kolde, R. _pheatmap: Pretty Heatmaps_. (2019).
*   57.Martin M. Cutadapt removes adapter sequences from high-throughput sequencing reads. EMBnet.journal. 2011;17:10–12. doi: 10.14806/ej.17.1.200. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.14806/ej.17.1.200)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=EMBnet.journal&title=Cutadapt%20removes%20adapter%20sequences%20from%20high-throughput%20sequencing%20reads&author=M%20Martin&volume=17&publication_year=2011&pages=10-12&doi=10.14806/ej.17.1.200&)\]
*   58.Krueger F, Andrews SR. Bismark: A flexible aligner and methylation caller for Bisulfite-Seq applications. Bioinforma. Oxf. Engl. 2011;27:1571–1572. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btr167. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btr167)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3102221/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21493656/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bioinforma.%20Oxf.%20Engl.&title=Bismark:%20A%20flexible%20aligner%20and%20methylation%20caller%20for%20Bisulfite-Seq%20applications&author=F%20Krueger&author=SR%20Andrews&volume=27&publication_year=2011&pages=1571-1572&pmid=21493656&doi=10.1093/bioinformatics/btr167&)\]
*   59.Wreczycka K, et al. Strategies for analyzing bisulfite sequencing data. J. Biotechnol. 2017;261:105–115. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2017.08.007. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiotec.2017.08.007)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28822795/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Biotechnol.&title=Strategies%20for%20analyzing%20bisulfite%20sequencing%20data&author=K%20Wreczycka&volume=261&publication_year=2017&pages=105-115&pmid=28822795&doi=10.1016/j.jbiotec.2017.08.007&)\]
*   60.Akalin A, et al. methylKit: A comprehensive R package for the analysis of genome-wide DNA methylation profiles. Genome Biol. 2012;13:R87. doi: 10.1186/gb-2012-13-10-r87. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/gb-2012-13-10-r87)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3491415/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23034086/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genome%20Biol.&title=methylKit:%20A%20comprehensive%20R%20package%20for%20the%20analysis%20of%20genome-wide%20DNA%20methylation%20profiles&author=A%20Akalin&volume=13&publication_year=2012&pages=R87&pmid=23034086&doi=10.1186/gb-2012-13-10-r87&)\]
*   61.Wang H-Q, Tuominen LK, Tsai C-J. SLIM: A sliding linear model for estimating the proportion of true null hypotheses in datasets with dependence structures. Bioinforma. Oxf. Engl. 2011;27:225–231. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btq650. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btq650)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21098430/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bioinforma.%20Oxf.%20Engl.&title=SLIM:%20A%20sliding%20linear%20model%20for%20estimating%20the%20proportion%20of%20true%20null%20hypotheses%20in%20datasets%20with%20dependence%20structures&author=H-Q%20Wang&author=LK%20Tuominen&author=C-J%20Tsai&volume=27&publication_year=2011&pages=225-231&pmid=21098430&doi=10.1093/bioinformatics/btq650&)\]
*   62.Akalin A, Franke V, Vlahoviček K, Mason CE, Schübeler D. Genomation: A toolkit to summarize, annotate and visualize genomic intervals. Bioinforma. Oxf. Engl. 2015;31:1127–1129. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btu775. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btu775)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25417204/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bioinforma.%20Oxf.%20Engl.&title=Genomation:%20A%20toolkit%20to%20summarize,%20annotate%20and%20visualize%20genomic%20intervals&author=A%20Akalin&author=V%20Franke&author=K%20Vlahovi%C4%8Dek&author=CE%20Mason&author=D%20Sch%C3%BCbeler&volume=31&publication_year=2015&pages=1127-1129&pmid=25417204&doi=10.1093/bioinformatics/btu775&)\]
*   63.Lawrence M, et al. Software for computing and annotating genomic ranges. PLOS Comput. Biol. 2013;9:e1003118. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003118. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003118)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3738458/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23950696/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLOS%20Comput.%20Biol.&title=Software%20for%20computing%20and%20annotating%20genomic%20ranges&author=M%20Lawrence&volume=9&publication_year=2013&pages=e1003118&pmid=23950696&doi=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003118&)\]
*   64.Yu G, Wang L-G, Han Y, He Q-Y. clusterProfiler: An R package for comparing biological themes among gene clusters. Omics J. Integr. Biol. 2012;16:284–287. doi: 10.1089/omi.2011.0118. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1089/omi.2011.0118)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3339379/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22455463/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Omics%20J.%20Integr.%20Biol.&title=clusterProfiler:%20An%20R%20package%20for%20comparing%20biological%20themes%20among%20gene%20clusters&author=G%20Yu&author=L-G%20Wang&author=Y%20Han&author=Q-Y%20He&volume=16&publication_year=2012&pages=284-287&pmid=22455463&doi=10.1089/omi.2011.0118&)\]
*   65.Supek F, Bošnjak M, Škunca N, Šmuc T. REVIGO summarizes and visualizes long lists of gene ontology terms. PLoS ONE. 2011;6:e21800. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021800. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0021800)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3138752/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21789182/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20ONE&title=REVIGO%20summarizes%20and%20visualizes%20long%20lists%20of%20gene%20ontology%20terms&author=F%20Supek&author=M%20Bo%C5%A1njak&author=N%20%C5%A0kunca&author=T%20%C5%A0muc&volume=6&publication_year=2011&pages=e21800&pmid=21789182&doi=10.1371/journal.pone.0021800&)\]
*   66.Gaspar JM, Hart RP. DMRfinder: Efficiently identifying differentially methylated regions from MethylC-seq data. BMC Bioinform. 2017;18:528. doi: 10.1186/s12859-017-1909-0. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-017-1909-0)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5817627/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29187143/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=BMC%20Bioinform.&title=DMRfinder:%20Efficiently%20identifying%20differentially%20methylated%20regions%20from%20MethylC-seq%20data&author=JM%20Gaspar&author=RP%20Hart&volume=18&publication_year=2017&pages=528&pmid=29187143&doi=10.1186/s12859-017-1909-0&)\]
*   67.Campagna MP, et al. Epigenome-wide association studies: Current knowledge, strategies and recommendations. Clin. Epigenetics. 2021;13:214. doi: 10.1186/s13148-021-01200-8. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13148-021-01200-8)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8645110/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34863305/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin.%20Epigenetics&title=Epigenome-wide%20association%20studies:%20Current%20knowledge,%20strategies%20and%20recommendations&author=MP%20Campagna&volume=13&publication_year=2021&pages=214&pmid=34863305&doi=10.1186/s13148-021-01200-8&)\]
*   68.Subramanian A, et al. Gene set enrichment analysis: A knowledge-based approach for interpreting genome-wide expression profiles. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2005;102:15545–15550. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0506580102. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0506580102)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1239896/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16199517/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc.%20Natl.%20Acad.%20Sci.%20U.%20S.%20A.&title=Gene%20set%20enrichment%20analysis:%20A%20knowledge-based%20approach%20for%20interpreting%20genome-wide%20expression%20profiles&author=A%20Subramanian&volume=102&publication_year=2005&pages=15545-15550&pmid=16199517&doi=10.1073/pnas.0506580102&)\]
*   69.Chen EY, et al. Enrichr: Interactive and collaborative HTML5 gene list enrichment analysis tool. BMC Bioinform. 2013;14:128. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-14-128. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-14-128)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3637064/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23586463/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=BMC%20Bioinform.&title=Enrichr:%20Interactive%20and%20collaborative%20HTML5%20gene%20list%20enrichment%20analysis%20tool&author=EY%20Chen&volume=14&publication_year=2013&pages=128&pmid=23586463&doi=10.1186/1471-2105-14-128&)\]
*   70.Chen J, Bardes EE, Aronow BJ, Jegga AG. ToppGene Suite for gene list enrichment analysis and candidate gene prioritization. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009;37:W305–311. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp427. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkp427)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2703978/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19465376/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nucleic%20Acids%20Res.&title=ToppGene%20Suite%20for%20gene%20list%20enrichment%20analysis%20and%20candidate%20gene%20prioritization&author=J%20Chen&author=EE%20Bardes&author=BJ%20Aronow&author=AG%20Jegga&volume=37&publication_year=2009&pages=W305-311&pmid=19465376&doi=10.1093/nar/gkp427&)\]

## Associated Data

_This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article._

### Supplementary Materials

### Data Availability Statement

Transcription profiling and methylation data were downloaded from NASA’s GeneLab platform ([https://genelab-data.ndc.nasa.gov/genelab/accession/GLDS-203/](https://genelab-data.ndc.nasa.gov/genelab/accession/GLDS-203/); version 6). All software packages are open source and have been cited in the Methods section.