---
title: "Characterization of metagenome-assembled genomes from the International Space Station"
authors: ["Nitin K Singh", "Jason M Wood", "Jose Patane", "Livia Maria Silva Moura", "Jonathan Lombardino", "João Carlos Setubal", "Kasthuri Venkateswaran"]
journal: "Microbiome"
date: "2023 Jun 1"
doi: "10.1186/s40168-023-01545-7"
source_url: "https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10233975/"
---

# Characterization of metagenome-assembled genomes from the International Space Station

*Microbiome*, 2023 Jun 1, [doi:10.1186/s40168-023-01545-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-023-01545-7)

### Nitin K Singh
### Jason M Wood
### Jose Patane
### Livia Maria Silva Moura
### Jonathan Lombardino
### João Carlos Setubal
### Kasthuri Venkateswaran

## Abstract

### Background

Several investigations on the microbial diversity and functional properties of the International Space Station (ISS) environment were carried out to understand the influence of spaceflight conditions on the microbial population. However, metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) of ISS samples are yet to be generated and subjected to various genomic analyses, including phylogenetic affiliation, predicted functional pathways, antimicrobial resistance, and virulence characteristics.

### Results

In total, 46 MAGs were assembled from 21 ISS environmental metagenomes, in which metaSPAdes yielded 20 MAGs and metaWRAP generated 26 MAGs. Among 46 MAGs retrieved, 18 bacterial species were identified, including one novel genus/species combination (_Kalamiella piersonii_) and one novel bacterial species (_Methylobacterium ajmalii_). In addition, four bins exhibited fungal genomes; this is the first-time fungal genomes were assembled from ISS metagenomes. Phylogenetic analyses of five bacterial species showed ISS-specific evolution. The genes pertaining to cell membranes, such as transmembrane transport, cell wall organization, and regulation of cell shape, were enriched. Variations in the antimicrobial-resistant (AMR) and virulence genes of the selected 20 MAGs were characterized to predict the ecology and evolution of biosafety level (BSL) 2 microorganisms in space. Since microbial virulence increases in microgravity, AMR gene sequences of MAGs were compared with genomes of respective ISS isolates and corresponding type strains. Among these 20 MAGs characterized, AMR genes were more prevalent in the _Enterobacter bugandensis_ MAG, which has been predominantly isolated from clinical samples. MAGs were further used to analyze if genes involved in AMR and biofilm formation of viable microbes in ISS have variation due to generational evolution in microgravity and radiation pressure.

### Conclusions

Comparative analyses of MAGs and whole-genome sequences of related ISS isolates and their type strains were characterized to understand the variation related to the microbial evolution under microgravity. The _Pantoea_/_Kalamiella_ strains have the maximum single-nucleotide polymorphisms found within the ISS strains examined. This may suggest that _Pantoea_/_Kalamiella_ strains are much more subjective to microgravity changes. The reconstructed genomes will enable researchers to study the evolution of genomes under microgravity and low-dose irradiation compared to the evolution of microbes here on Earth.

### Supplementary Information

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40168-023-01545-7.

**Keywords:** Metagenome-assembled genomes, Genome-inferred phenotype, Microgravity, ISS

## Introduction

Since the publication of the first metagenome-assembled genome (MAG) in 2004 \[[1](#CR1)\], MAGs have been used to confirm genomic data for taxonomic identification of uncultivated microorganisms, metabolic profiling, microbiome dynamics, and host-microbe relationships \[[2](#CR2)\]. When a MAG is assembled, annotation and interpretation of genes are possible, allowing researchers to better understand the metabolic potential of the microbe, including its potential resistance to antibiotics, interactions with other microbes in the microbial community, and association with a host \[[3](#CR3)\]. MAGs have been successfully used to discover uncultivated species \[[4](#CR4)\], candidatus organisms like _Candidatus Amarolinea aalborgensis_ gen. nov., sp. nov. \[[5](#CR5)\], and novel genera like _Spiribacter_ \[[6](#CR6)\] and _Kalamiella_ \[[7](#CR7)\]. MAGs have also been used to recover genomic clusters of secondary metabolites \[[8](#CR8)\], genetic mobility \[[4](#CR4)\], metabolic pathways \[[9](#CR9)\], and in situ replication \[[10](#CR10)\]. Projects retrieving thousands of MAGs have also been documented to understand yet-to-be cultured microbiomes of cow rumens and other environmental samples \[[11](#CR11)\]. In addition, MAGs have revealed new microbial phyla, which have expanded the tree of life \[[12](#CR12)\].

Lowering sequencing cost, curated data availability in public database, and advances in computational biology have made assembling MAGs from complex and extreme environments easy. A higher number of reference genomes makes the binning easier and more reliable. Multiple best practices are available to construct accurate and complete genomes from metagenomes, but high-quality MAGs are still relatively rare. Most MAGs reported in many MAG-related papers have completeness levels between 50 and 60% \[[13](#CR13)\].

Recently, MAGs generated from International Space Station (ISS) environmental metagenomes paved a way to describe a novel genus and species, _Kalamiella piersonii_ \[[7](#CR7)\]. We have retrieved four _K. piersonii_ MAGs (100% genome sequence identity) from ISS environmental metagenomes that allowed us to identify a cultivated isolate archived from the same samples using gene-specific assays \[[7](#CR7)\]. This “genome to phenome” approach enabled the differentiation of closely related genera _Pantoea_ from _Kalamiella_ and facilitated the isolation of several ISS strains (_n_ = 7) that were archived and previously unidentified \[[7](#CR7)\]. Furthermore, the use of MAGs and whole-genome sequences (WGS) of biosafety level 2 (BSL-2) species, _Klebsiella pneumoniae_, isolated from three consecutive samplings of the ISS at eight defined locations made it possible to track the source of the original BSL-2 strain and understand the succession, persistence, and spread of this opportunistic pathogen detected in the ISS \[[14](#CR14)\].

The objectives of this study were to retrieve near full-length genomes from metagenomes generated from ISS environmental samples and perform in-depth functional and phylogenetic analyses. Among 46 MAGs generated during this study, functional analyses such as antimicrobial resistance (AMR), virulence characteristic, and metabolic traits/stress responses were carried out for 20 prokaryotic MAGs. In addition to the prokaryotic MAGs (~85% completeness), this is the first-time eukaryotic MAGs (~50% completeness) were also generated from ISS metagenomes using the co-assembly strategy.

## Material and methods

### Data source and sample description

Data used for this study were acquired from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Short Read Archive under the bio-project number PRJNA438545. A detailed description of shotgun metagenome sequencing and ISS locations sampled were published elsewhere \[[14](#CR14)\]. In this research communication, we utilized shotgun metagenome reads generated from the propidium monoazide (PMA)-treated samples only \[[15](#CR15)\] to understand whether these MAGs were stemming from the viable and intact cells. However, for eukaryotic analysis, we used shotgun metagenome reads from both PMA and non-PMA-treated samples.

### Metagenome-assembled bacterial genomes

Paired-end 100-bp metagenomic reads were processed with Trimmomatic \[[16](#CR16)\] to remove adapter sequences and low-quality ends, with a minimum Phred score of 20 across the entire length of the read used as a quality cutoff. Reads shorter than 80 bp were removed after trimming. The remaining high-quality reads were subsequently assembled using metaSPAdes \[[17](#CR17)\]. Contigs were binned using Metabat2 \[v. 2.11.3\] \[[18](#CR18)\]. Recovered genomes were evaluated with CheckM \[[19](#CR19)\], and a recovered genome was considered good with ~85% completeness and at most 10% contamination. Each genome was subsequently annotated with the help of Rapid Annotations using Subsystems Technology (RAST), and taxonomic identifications and phylogenetic affiliations were predicted \[[20](#CR20)\]. In addition to running the procedure above, we also ran the metaWRAP pipeline on the same datasets, using default parameters \[[21](#CR21)\].

In order to test for assemblies suspected to be the same among the 20 metaSPAdes genomes and the set of genomes obtained using metaWRAP for the same set of reads (“meta-set”), we compared both assembly sets using Mash \[[22](#CR22)\] distances. Then, we kept only the best MAG under a Mash distance < = 0.05 (corresponds to average nucleotide identity, _ANI_ > = 95%). After gathering the relevant reference genomes and MAGs, Amphora2 \[[23](#CR23)\] was employed to retrieve a protein set composed of 31 universal bacterial markers, which were then aligned by Muscle \[[24](#CR24)\]. Finally, a phylogeny was inferred by maximum likelihood using the concatenated dataset under IQTREE \[[25](#CR25)\] with a concomitant search for the best evolutionary protein model.

For each sample, our final list of bacterial MAGs contains only those MAGs that were considered distinct from one another. When two MAGs were considered “the same” for a given sample, we chose the metaSPAdes version.

### Phylogenetic comparison of the ISS bacterial MAGs obtained by the two methods

MAGs assembled from the ISS dataset by two methods (metaSPAdes metaWRAP) were tested for the phylogenetic clustering within the same species clade. All assemblies from both methods were positioned according to the most exclusive clade in the Bacteria Tree of Life to which individual Genome Taxonomy Database (GTDB) classifications matched (e.g., the most exclusive taxonomic group containing _Staphylococcus_, _Bacillus_, and _Paenibacillus_ would be _Bacillales_). After defining such taxonomic groups, a new phylogeny was estimated for each of them. Besides the reconstructed genomes themselves, for each supposed species, we also added three reference genomes from NCBI of the same species (picked sparsely and randomly from its automatically generated species dendrogram tree) while also including two/three other species from the same genus (at least a close species and a not too distant one), each of them being represented by three sparse genomes in their respective species dendrograms. Such an analysis is liberal enough to indicate whether different assemblies from the same reads would indeed cluster together.

### Metagenome-assembled fungal genomes

One of the main focus of this study was assembling eukaryotic genomes from the ISS metagenome. When tools to construct prokaryotic MAGs were used, eukaryotic MAGs were low quality, and results were not satisfactory to identify them as fungal genomes. Additionally, the availability of reference data falls short for eukaryotic genome assembly. To overcome this, we used a completely independent co-assembly-based strategy in the tool ANVIO \[[18](#CR18)\] on the complete ISS dataset using PMA-treated and untreated samples. All the steps were followed as per the step-by-step metagenomic procedure available on the ANVIO website ([http://merenlab.org/2016/06/22/anvio-tutorial-v2/](http://merenlab.org/2016/06/22/anvio-tutorial-v2/)). In short, quality filtering was carried out using the script _iu-filter-quality-minoche_. MEGAHIT \[[26](#CR26)\]-based co-assembly was performed on the quality-filtered reads from the 42 samples. Names in the co-assembled fasta file were simplified using the script _anvi-script-reformat-fasta_. A contig database was generated using “anvi-gen-contigs-database.” The contig database was run through hidden Markov models (HMM) based HMMER \[[27](#CR27)\]. NCBI – COG was used to identify the genes in the co-assembly fasta files. Individual profiles were generated for each sample using _anvi-profile_ and _anvi-merge_ to cluster all the profiles using Euclidean distance and Ward’s linkage algorithm. Final results of co-assembly bins in ANVIO tools were interactively visualized using _anvi-interactive_. All ANVIO results were exported in the summary format for further downstream processing.

Each bin generated in ANVIO profiles was treated as an individual genome, and quality was assessed using CheckM. To establish the taxonomic identification of each bin, they were further subjected to GTDB-Tk (Genome Taxonomy Database Toolkit) \[[28](#CR28)\]. All the bins were compared with 24,706 genomes constituting 8792 validly published bacterial species ([https://www.bacterio.net/](https://www.bacterio.net/)). GTDB-Tk can only identify prokaryotic genomes; hence, all the bins not defined by the GTDB-Tk were considered as eukaryotic taxa and further manually curated for genomic identification.

Determining the closest fungal species to each MAG was carried out in three steps. First, we used BLASTn to search GenBank, aimed at circumscribing the innermost taxonomic rank quickly (e.g., genus if multiple species within that genus were found across different BLAST hits or family if different genera within the family are found in the BLAST hits). For this search, five different BLASTn searches were performed per MAG. For each such BLASTn search, a random genomic segment of 2000 bp was chosen while also certifying that this segment is within a minimum of 1000 bp from its respective contig end (to minimize possible assembly issues that are more prevalent at contig edges).

Secondly, for those MAGs whose BLAST results were not hitting a single species, phylogenomic analysis was employed with all assemblies/genomes within that innermost rank (as described above) found in either GenBank or Joint Genome Institute (JGI) MycoCosm (with at most three genomes per species). A set of 758 conserved proteins across fungi, available from the BUSCO pipeline \[[29](#CR29)\] (database: fungi\_odb10), were sought in every assembly. Because there can be differences in the number of BUSCO genes found per genome, due to variation in assembly completeness, we built a subset of the dataset where each protein is present in at least 1/3 of the MAGs, reference genomes, and two previously chosen outgroups (_Ustilago maydis_ and _Dacryopinax primogenitus_) used for proper rooting of the phylogeny. Multiple alignments per gene were carried out using Mafft \[[30](#CR30)\]. Two alternative species tree inference analyses were performed, one IQ, and another inference done by Astral \[[31](#CR31)\], which is based on an amalgamation of quartet trees sampled from each individual gene tree (where each of the 758 gene trees had been previously estimated in IQ-TREE).

Thirdly, Mash distances \[[22](#CR22)\] were computed to confirm the species (either MAGs that went through phylogenomic analyses or MAGs assigned to a single species in the first BLASTn step). According to Gostinčar \[[32](#CR32)\], a Mash distance below 0.04 is sufficient to assign any two fungal genomes to the same species for k-mer sizes between 16 and 22 bp \[[32](#CR32)\].

### Comparative phylogenetic analysis

In order to include a background of Earth-origin genomes to anchor ISS genomes, and therefore pinpoint where in the phylogeny of ISS microorganisms evolved from, we searched in GenBank for genomes of _Staphylococcus aureus_, _S. saprophyticus_, _Klebsiella quasipneumoniae_, _Kalamiella piersonii_, and _Pantoea brenneri_. When available, two genomes of each species per year were retrieved and used in the analysis.

Get\_Homologues \[[33](#CR33)\] was used to cluster protein-coding genes into gene families. Unicopy genes (i.e., genes with a single copy in every included genome of the species) were then retrieved to build the phylogenetic trees per species and to further assess amino acid changes. Mafft \[[30](#CR30)\] with default parameters was used to obtain multiple alignments for each gene family. Alignments were then concatenated into a supermatrix using FASconCat \[[34](#CR34)\]. IQ-TREE \[[25](#CR25)\] was used to infer the phylogeny from this supermatrix, using a LG + I + G model and 1000 ultra-fast bootstraps to assess branch support.

In-house python scripts were used to annotate amino acid substitutions and indels (i.e., events of either insertion or deletion of amino acids). Pannzer 2 \[[35](#CR35)\] was used to gather GO information (minimum query and subject cover of 80%, minimum alignment length of 50 aa; other parameters as default) for all genes having amino acid point substitutions that changed hydrophobicity (i.e., from hydrophobic to hydrophilic or vice versa). Such substitutions are more susceptible of being under natural selection, because they have a higher probability of having an impact on the three-dimensional protein structure.

### Comparative functional analysis

Genome assemblies and associated RefSeq annotations for each strain were downloaded from NCBI’s RefSeq database. Due to their exclusion from the RefSeq database, the meta-genome-assembled genomes (MAGs) assemblies and associated annotations were downloaded from their original GenBank accessions. For each of the species of interest in this study, representative type strains were selected for comparison. To compare nucleotide-level identities for each of the analyzed genomes against their respective type strains, BLASTn (−evalue 1e-05) alignments were conducted and visualized with BLAST Ring Image Generator (BRIG), version 0.95 \[[36](#CR36)\]. BLASTn identities were color coded according to the origin of the genome assembly for ISS isolates (purple) or MAGs (blue), with the intensity of their color corresponding to custom percent identity cutoffs (high: 90%, lower: 80%, minimum: 50%). To assess the completeness of each assembly, the open reading frames (ORFs) of 13 housekeeping genes were identified for each species reference genome using keyword searches of the feature\_table.txt file included with each assembly: DNA gyrase subunit A (_gyrA_), DNA gyrase subunit B (_gyrB_), 50S ribosomal protein L35 (_rpmI_), 50S ribosomal protein L20 (_rplT_), 30S ribosomal protein S12 (_rpsL_), 30S ribosomal protein S7 (_rpsG_), DNA-directed RNA polymerase subunit beta (_rpoB_), DNA topoisomerase IV subunit A (_parC_), DNA topoisomerase IV subunit B (_parE_), translation initiation factor IF-3 (_infC_), elongation factor Tu (_tuf_), elongation factor G (_fusA_), and cation translocating P-type ATPase (_mgtA_, _zntA_, _actP_, _cadA_, _copB_). Of note, to render MAGs with multiple contigs, BRIG orders each contig into a contiguous assembly to be displayed as a single circular chromosome, causing contig-relative start and end coordinates provided in the assembly feature\_table.txt file to not necessarily match the absolute coordinates generated by BRIG. Thus, a custom code was written to transpose the housekeeping genes’ contig-relative start and end coordinates into the absolute coordinates assigned by BRIG. These absolute ORF coordinates were then used as annotations to display on the reference genome on the outermost layer of each BRIG figure. The associated code used to identify these features and convert their coordinates can be found here: [https://github.com/jlombo96/MAG\_2023\_Code](https://github.com/jlombo96/MAG_2023_Code).

### Gene-based AMR and biofilm study

Selected genes involved in AMR and biofilm formation were studied. AMR genes were selected based on the abundance in various MAGs, while _E. bugandensis_ MAG was chosen for biofilm formation based on the previously reported studies \[[37](#CR37)\].

All AMR gene sequences found in the 20 annotated MAGs were tabulated for comparative analysis. Genes include DNA gyrase and LSU and SSU ribosomal protein units. All identified genes were put into NCBI Nucleotide BLAST (RefSeq), and the top hits with ≥ 98% identity cutoff were compiled in a fasta text file for analysis using MEGA 7 \[[38](#CR38)\]. The genes were aligned using ClusterW, and the Neighbor-Joining algorithm was used to make phylogenetic trees. Nosocomial (hospital/Earth) strains were used for comparison to the MAGs since AMR has been reported to increase under microgravity \[[14](#CR14)\].

The NCBI database was used to derive WGS of _E. bugandensis_. DSMZ and LPSN were used to determine the type strains. Identified strains of _E. bugandensis_ were analyzed using the IMG JGI database and used to search for biofilm-forming genes (_pgaA_, _pgaB_, _pgaC_, _pgaD_) and quorum-sensing genes (_LsrK_, _LsrA_, _AI-2 luxS_, _LsrF_, _LsrB_, _LsrC_, _LsrD_, _LsrG_, _LsrR_). All gene sequences were downloaded as a fasta file per strain for downstream alignment analysis.

All downloaded fasta sequences for the biofilm and quorum-sensing genes of all the _E. bugandensis_ (_n_ = 15 + 1MAG) of interest were used for phylogenetic analysis with the MEGA7 software package. The downloaded fasta sequence for each gene (_n_ = 13) in the _E. bugandensis_ strains was aligned, conserved sites within that specific gene were observed across all strains versus the ISS isolates, and the variable sites were also observed and quantified for that particular gene.

All areas of interest in the aligned sequences were highlighted and observed for nucleotide differences in each of the 16 strains that are different from that of the EB-247T, which is the type strain of the genus. The position of the nucleotide change in the codon was observed to see if it is in the first, second, or third position to determine if it would lead to a synonymous mutation or a new amino acid formation. MEGA7 software using the aligned gene sequence was used to create a neighbor-joining (NJ) phylogenetic tree for each gene with the bootstrap data set at 1000.

## Results and discussion

### Metagenome-assembled bacterial genomes

Out of the 42 ISS metagenomes submitted at NCBI, only PMA-treated metagenomes (_n_ = 21) representing the viable/intact cells were used for generating bacterial MAGs. Characteristics of MAGs (_n_ = 46) such as genome size (2.6 to 6.6 Mb), completeness, contamination percentage, the average mean coverage, number of scaffolds, and N50 (5 to 670 Kb) were calculated using CheckM, and assembly statistics are summarized in Table [1](#Tab1). Sample collection date, location, relative humidity, radiation exposure, etc. are given in Table [1](#Tab1), and various other details such as materials of the location and partial pressure have already been published \[[14](#CR14), [15](#CR15)\]. A bacterial MAG was considered acceptable during this study if CheckM completeness was more than 85% and contamination was less than 10%. When metaSPAdes was used, 20 MAGs were recovered, and housekeeping genes were used to confirm the identity, contamination, and completeness of MAGs. In addition, when metaWRAP was used, 26 MAGs were assembled from the same 21 PMA-treated ISS environmental metagenomes. When metaSPAdes and metaWRAP pipelines generated MAGs were compared, a total of 16 one-to-one matches were detected between them, suggesting these two different assembly strategies identified the identical genomes. Among the metaWRAP-assembled genomes, 11 MAGs had smaller genome sizes, which may be due to the more conservative nature of the metaWRAP procedure. The correlation between metaSPAde (20 MAGs) and metaWRAP (26 MAGs) is shown in Supplementary Fig. S[1](#MOESM1) (_R_2 was 0.85).

#### Table 1.

Bacterial MAGs recovered from ISS metagenomic samples treated with PMA

| Samplea | Species identified | NCBI accession no. of type strain | Type strain | ANI with type strain (%) | CheckM completeness (%) | Identified pipeline (MetaSPAdes and metaWRAP) | Location | Temperature | Relative humidity | Radiation measurements (TEPCb; µGy; total dose/day session) | Sampling date |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| F1-2P | _Enterobacter bugandensis_ | [NZ\_LT992502.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NZ_LT992502.1) | EB-247 | 98.62 | 99.37 | Yes | Waste and hygiene compartment | 22.9 | 40.20 | 268 | 3/4/15 |
| F1-2P | _Klebsiella quasipneumoniae_ | [CCDF00000000.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/CCDF00000000.1) | 01A030 | 96.60 | 99.40 | MetaWRAP | Waste and hygiene compartment | 22.9 | 40.20 | 268 | 3/4/15 |
| F1-4P | _Staphylococcus aureus_ | [NZ\_CP035101.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NZ_CP035101.1) | ATCC 12600 | 98.25 | 90.81 | MetaSPAdes | Surface of the dining table | 22.9 | 40.20 | 268 | 3/4/15 |
| F1-5P | _Pantoea brenneri_ | [MLFN00000000.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/MLFN00000000.1) | LMG 24534 | 99.13 | 100.00 | Yes | US node 1, zero-G stowage rack | 26.0 | 40.20 | 268 | 3/4/15 |
| F1-7P | _Methylobacterium ajmalii_ | GCF\_016613415.1 | IF7SW-B2 | 99.98 | 100.00 | MetaWRAP | Overhead 3 panel surface of the Materials Science Research Rack 1 | 22.2 | 40.20 | 268 | 3/4/15 |
| F1-8P | _Microbacterium aurum_ | [NZ\_BCWI00000000.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NZ_BCWI00000000.1) | NBRC 15708 | 95.95 | 94.11 | Yes | Crew quarters-2 bump-out exterior aft wall | 22.6 | 40.20 | 268 | 3/4/15 |
| F2-1P | _Acinetobacter pittii_ | [BBST00000000.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/BBST00000000.1)/ | DSM 25618 | 98.26 | 100.00 | MetaSPAdes | Port panel of the cupola | 22.8 | 39.25 | 380 | 5/15/15 |
| F2-1P | _Kocuria palustris_ | NZ\_JAFBCR000000000.1 | DSM 11925 | 98.87 | 100.00 | MetaSPAdes | Port panel of the cupola | 22.8 | 39.25 | 380 | 5/15/15 |
| F2-2P | _Staphylococcus saprophyticus_ | [PPRA00000000.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/PPRA00000000.1)/ | CCUG 38042 | 99.62 | 99.44 | MetaSPAdes | Waste and hygiene compartment | 22.8 | 39.25 | 380 | 5/15/15 |
| F2-5P | _Paenibacillus polymyxa_ | [NZ\_CP049783.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NZ_CP049783.1) | DSM 36 | 98.34 | 99.56 | Yes | US node 1, zero-G stowage rack | 24.7 | 39.25 | 380 | 5/15/15 |
| F2-5P | _Pantoea brenneri_ | [MLFN00000000.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/MLFN00000000.1) | LMG 24534 | 99.13 | 100.00 | Yes | US node 1, zero-G stowage rack | 24.7 | 39.25 | 380 | 5/15/15 |
| F2-7P | _Bacillus velezensis_ | [LHCC00000000.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/LHCC00000000.1)/ | KCTC 13012 | 98.05 | 90.39 | MetaWRAP | Overhead-3 panel surface of the Materials Science Research Rack 1 | 21.8 | 39.25 | 380 | 5/15/15 |
| F2-7P | _Methylobacterium ajmalii_ | GCF\_016613415.1 | IF7SW-B2 | 99.98 | 100.00 | Yes | Overhead-3 panel surface of the Materials Science Research Rack 1 | 21.8 | 39.25 | 380 | 5/15/15 |
| F2-7P | _Sphingomonas sanguinis_ | [BCTY00000000](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/BCTY00000000) | NBRC 13937 | 99.71 | 99.42 | Yes | Overhead-3 panel surface of the Materials Science Research Rack 1 | 21.8 | 39.25 | 380 | 5/15/15 |
| F2-7P | _Staphylococcus saprophyticus_ | [NC\_007350.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NC_007350.1) | ATCC 15305 | 99.55 | 98.89 | MetaWRAP | Overhead-3 panel surface of the Materials Science Research Rack 1 | 21.8 | 39.25 | 380 | 5/15/15 |
| F2-8P | _Methylorubrum extorquens_ | [NZ\_LT962688.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NZ_LT962688.1) | TK 0001 | 96.57 | 98.28 | MetaWRAP | Crew quarters-2 bump-out exterior aft wall | 22.8 | 39.25 | 380 | 5/15/15 |
| F2-8P | _Paenibacillus polymyxa_ | [NZ\_CP049783.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NZ_CP049783.1) | DSM 36 | 98.30 | 99.85 | Yes | Crew quarters-2 bump-out exterior aft wall | 22.8 | 39.25 | 380 | 5/15/15 |
| F2-8P | _Staphylococcus aureus_ | [NZ\_CP035101.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NZ_CP035101.1) | ATCC 12600 | 97.48 | 97.46 | Yes | Crew quarters-2 bump-out exterior aft wall | 22.8 | 39.25 | 380 | 5/15/15 |
| F3-1P | _Kalamiella piersonii_ | [NZ\_RARB00000000.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NZ_RARB00000000.1) | IIIF1SW-P2 | 99.99 | 89.69 | Yes | Port panel of the cupola | 20.8 | 41.25 | 162 | 5/5/16 |
| F3-2P | _Cutibacterium acnes_ | [NZ\_CP023676.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NZ_CP023676.1) | ATCC 6919 | 99.74 | 91.36 | MetaWRAP | Waste and hygiene compartment | 21.9 | 41.25 | 162 | 5/5/16 |
| F3-2P | _Staphylococcus saprophyticus_ | [NC\_007350.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NC_007350.1) | ATCC 15305 | 99.33 | 96.57 | Yes | Waste and hygiene compartment | 21.9 | 41.25 | 162 | 5/5/16 |
| F3-3P | _Klebsiella pneumoniae_ | [JOOW00000000](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/JOOW00000000) | ATCC 13883 | 96.55 | 89.66 | MetaSPAdes | The foot platform of the Advanced Resistive Exercise Device | 21.9 | 41.25 | 162 | 5/5/16 |
| F3-3P | _Klebsiella quasipneumoniae_ | [NZ\_CP012252.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NZ_CP012252.1) | 01A030 | 96.59 | 98.47 | MetaWRAP | The foot platform of the Advanced Resistive Exercise Device | 21.9 | 41.25 | 162 | 5/5/16 |
| F3-3P | _Staphylococcus saprophyticus_ | [NC\_007350.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NC_007350.1) | ATCC 15305 | 99.52 | 82.39 | MetaWRAP | The foot platform of the Advanced Resistive Exercise Device | 21.9 | 41.25 | 162 | 5/5/16 |
| F3-4P | _Pantoea dispersa_ | [NZ\_SCKT00000000.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NZ_SCKT00000000.1) | DSM 30073 | 98.00 | 99.33 | Yes | Surface of the dining table | 21.9 | 41.25 | 162 | 5/5/16 |
| F3-4P | _Pantoea dispersa_ | [NZ\_SCKT00000000.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NZ_SCKT00000000.1) | DSM 30073 | 97.89 | 92.92 | Yes | Surface of the dining table | 21.9 | 41.25 | 162 | 5/5/16 |
| F3-5P | _Kalamiella piersonii_ | [NZ\_RARB00000000.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NZ_RARB00000000.1) | IIIF1SW-P2 | 99.98 | 88.94 | Yes | US node 1, zero-G stowage rack | 27.2 | 41.25 | 162 | 5/5/16 |
| F3-7P | _Kalamiella piersonii_ | [NZ\_RARB00000000.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NZ_RARB00000000.1) | IIIF1SW-P2 | 99.98 | 87.70 | Yes | Overhead-3 panel surface of the Materials Science Research Rack 1 | 21.4 | 41.25 | 162 | 5/5/16 |
| F3-7P | _Klebsiella aerogenes_ | [NC\_015663.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NC_015663.1) | KCTC 2190 | 98.52 | 90.49 | MetaWRAP | Overhead-3 panel surface of the Materials Science Research Rack 1 | 21.4 | 41.25 | 162 | 5/5/16 |
| F3-8P | _Kalamiella piersonii_ | [NZ\_RARB00000000.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NZ_RARB00000000.1) | IIIF1SW-P2 | 99.98 | 89.38 | Yes | Crew quarters-2 bump-out exterior aft wall | 20.8 | 41.25 | 162 | 5/5/16 |

aKey to samples, F1, F2, F3; flight, 1, 2, and 3. The numerals after flight numbers denote location from where sampled. P is PMA treated. Descriptions of the locations were published in detail in Singh et al. \[[37](#CR37)\]

b_TEPC_ US tissue equivalent proportional counter

### Species assignment analysis of ISS bacterial MAGs

Phylogenetic analysis of 30 unique bacterial MAGs of 46 generated showed 18 species (Table [1](#Tab1)). The bacterial species identity was based on the average nucleotide index (ANI; > 95%) of MAGs compared with the corresponding type strain. The majority of the MAGs (22 out of 46) belonged to the members of the order Enterobacterales and matched with six established enterobacterial species. In addition, MAGs from spore-forming bacteria (_Bacillus_ 1 MAG; _Paenibacillus_ 4 MAGs); human skin microbes, e.g., _Staphylococcus_ (8 MAGs); and actinobacterial (4 MAGs) members were retrieved. However, 11 MAGs were not identified to any of the genomes of well-established bacterial species. Subsequently, the _gyrB_ gene \[[39](#CR39)\] sequences were pulled from the MAGs and screened with sequences of a large number of ISS isolates (_n_ = 500 strains) archived in our culture collection. The ISS strains that exhibited the highest _gyrB_ sequence similarity (> 95%) were further sequenced for the whole genome and compared with the above 11 MAGs. This “metagenome to phenome” approach has enabled the description of one novel genus/species combination (_Kalamiella piersonii_; 8 MAGs; Singh et al., \[[7](#CR7)\]) and another novel bacterial species, _Methylobacterium ajmalii_ (_n_ = 3 MAGs; Bijlani et al., 2021). Interestingly, _Sphingomonadaceae_ MAGs retrieved from F2-7P samples that matched with yet to be identified _Sphingomonas_ sp. K11 strain genome (GenBank no. [CP013916.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/CP013916.1)) also matched with the WGS of three ISS strains isolated from the same location (flight no. 2, location no. 7). These were identified as _Sphingomonas sanguinis_, and functional characteristics were established, and production of plant growth-promoting substances was identified \[[40](#CR40)\].

### Metagenome-assembled fungal genomes

Conventional tools for MAG assembly are historically not meant for eukaryotic MAG assembly (strategy 1). Additionally, the sequencing depth requirement for eukaryotic MAG assembly is much higher compared to the prokaryotic genomes. We used a co-assembly-based analysis (strategy 2), using the tool ANVIO \[[18](#CR18)\] on the complete ISS dataset containing both the PMA-treated and untreated samples to increase the available data to accommodate eukaryotic MAG assembly. In an effort to make strategy 2 completely independent from strategy 1, the process was rerun using the ANVIO tool from the very initial step of read trimming and filtering. The minimum contig length considered to be included in the data was 1000 bp. The merged profile database that was generated with the minimum contig length of 1000 contained 40,455 contigs, which corresponded to 100% of all contigs, and 100% of all nucleotides found in the contigs database generated during the process. Out of the 84 bins, four bins were classified into the eukaryotic domain. As per the minimum requirement for MAG, completeness should be ≥ 50%, and contamination should be ≤ 10% \[[41](#CR41)\]. Two out of four genomes did not have the required 50% completeness, while the other two were subjected to genome refinement to reduce the redundancy below 10%. After genome evaluation with BUSCO, only four genome bins met the minimal standard for draft MAG, i.e., bins 7, 12, 60, and 73 (Fig. [1](#Fig1)).

The four fungal MAGs (Bin7, Bin12, Bin60, and Bin73) could be assigned to the species level by BLASTn searches plus Mash distance comparisons. Bin12 had four (among five) random genomic segments of 2000 bp matching _Rhodotorula mucilaginosa_ (ATCC 58901) > 99.9% hit identity, and the remaining segment corresponding _Rhodotorula_ sp. (CCFEE 5036). Bin12 Mash distance against the most complete assembly of this species (_R. mucilaginosa_ IF1SW-B1, an ISS strain; GCA\_013036955.1) was 0.0049, well below the 0.04 Mash distance threshold for k-mer sizes between 16 and 22 bp \[[32](#CR32)\], and therefore confirming it as _R. mucilaginosa_ (Table [2](#Tab2)). Regarding Bin60, the five BLASTn searches matched _Penicillium chrysogenum_ (genome Wisconsin 54-1255; GCA\_000710275.1) with percent similarity in the range 98.4–99.95% for the five segments. Mash confirmed the species, with a distance value of 0.007 (Table [2](#Tab2)). Regarding Bin73, the five BLASTn searches matched _Papiliotrema laurentii_ 5307AH v1.0 with a low Mash distance which confirmed the species as _P. laurentii_ and also showed high relationship with the genome of an ISS isolate IF7SW-B5 (GCA\_012922625.1; Table [2](#Tab2)). Regarding Bin7, BLASTn searches resulted in close matches to members of the _Naganishia_ genus. Mash distance calculation against the six closest genomes of this genus (four _Naganishia tulchinskyi_ and two _Naganishia liquefaciens_) showed that Bin7 can be assigned to species _N. tulchinskyi_ (Table [2](#Tab2)); for this bin, a phylogenetic analysis was also carried out confirming the _N. tulchinskyi_ classification (Fig. [1](#Fig1)). It is interesting to note that the “metagenome to phenome” approach applied for the bacterial MAGs also enabled the description of a novel yeast, _N. tulchinskyi_, from the ISS samples \[[42](#CR42)\].

#### Table 2.

Fungal MAGs recovered from ISS metagenomic reads

| MAG ID | K-mer size | Query ID | Mash distance | _p_\-value | Matching hashes |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Bin\_12 | 22 | GCA\_013036955.1\_Rhodotorula\_mucilaginosa\_IF1SW-B1.fna | 0.00485591 | 0 | 816/1000 |
| Bin\_60 | 22 | GCA\_000710275.1\_Penicillium\_chrysogenum\_ASM71027v1\_genomic.fna | 0.00662984 | 0 | 761/1000 |
| Bin\_73 | 22 | GCA\_012922625.1\_Papiliotrema\_laurentii\_IF7SW-B5.fna | 0.00251085 | 0 | 898/1000 |
| Bin\_7 | 22 | [JAAZPV010000089](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/JAAZPV010000089).1\_Naganishia\_tulchinskyi\_strain\_IF6SW-B1\_scaffold1018\_cov224.fna | 0.00616116 | 0 | 775/1000 |
| Bin\_7 | 22 | [JAAZPY010000044](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/JAAZPY010000044).1\_Naganishia\_tulchinskyi\_strain\_IIF5SW-F1\_scaffold102\_cov184.fna | 0.00616116 | 0 | 775/1000 |
| Bin\_7 | 22 | [JAAZQA010000042](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/JAAZQA010000042).1\_Naganishia\_tulchinskyi\_IF7SW-B1\_scaffold100\_cov213.fna | 0.00616116 | 0 | 775/1000 |
| Bin\_7 | 22 | [JAAZPZ010000100](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/JAAZPZ010000100).1\_Naganishia\_tulchinskyi\_strain\_IF1SW-F1\_scaffold1012\_cov89.fna | 0.00626056 | 0 | 772/1000 |
| Bin\_7 | 22 | [JACWFY010000001](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/JACWFY010000001).1\_Naganishia\_liquefaciens\_strain\_I2-R1\_I2-R1\_contig\_1.fna | 0.00622737 | 0 | 773/1000 |
| Bin\_7 | 22 | [BLZA01000001](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/BLZA01000001).1\_Naganishia\_liquefaciens\_N6\_DNA.fna | 0.0123325 | 0 | 616/1000 |
| Bin\_7 | 22 | [JABRPJ010000001](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/JABRPJ010000001).1\_Naganishia\_randhawae\_strain\_eABCC1\_contig\_1.fna | 0.251066 | 1.2444e-07 | 2/1000 |
| Bin\_7 | 22 | [LLJT01000001](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/LLJT01000001).1\_Naganishia\_albida\_strain\_NT2002\_contig1.fna | 0.251066 | 1.27629e-07 | 2/1000 |
| Bin\_7 | 22 | [MU158391](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/MU158391).1\_Naganishia\_vishniacii\_ANT03-052\_unplaced\_genomic\_scaffold\_Nagvi1qcScaffold\_1.fna | 0.282528 | 0.000492662 | 1/1000 |

BLAST-based genome comparisons visualized using BRIG for six species are shown in Fig. [2](#Fig2). They are as follows: _Acinetobacter pittii_, _E. bugandensis_, _K. piersonii_, _Klebsiella pneumoniae_, _M. ajmalii_, and _S. aureus_. The BRIG analysis revealed relatively high levels of identity shared across genomes of the ISS isolates and MAGs, when compared against their type strain genomes (Fig. [2](#Fig2)). Additionally, patterns of GC content for each bacterial species tested were highly similar to that of their respective type strain.

### Comparative phylogenetic analysis reveals evolution

The possible evolution in the ISS microorganisms was investigated with a careful species-by-species phylogenetic analysis. In this exercise, the following criteria were used: (i) ISS isolates, (ii) ISS MAGs, and (iii) at least one Earth-origin reference genome. The resulting candidate species genome data are shown in Supplementary Table S[2](#MOESM2), and they belong to _K. piersonii_, _K. quasipneumoniae_, _P. brenneri_, _S. aureus_, and _S. saprophyticus_.

The phylogenetic analyses for those five species showed that ISS genomes (isolates and MAGs) are always monophyletic. This is already suggestive of ISS-specific evolution. For two of those trees (_Kalamiella_ and _Pantoea_), there were not enough Earth-origin genomes available (Supplementary Fig. S[2](#MOESM1)). With reference to the _Staphylococcus aureus_ and _K. quasipneumoniae_ phylogenetic analysis with core genes, the inferred tree contains two ISS clades (Fig. [3](#Fig3) A and C, respectively), suggesting in both cases at least two separate introductions from an Earth source. However, for _S Staphylococcus saprophyticus_, all ISS genomes were placed within a single clade (Fig. [3](#Fig3)B).

The single-copy genes specific to either the ISS genomes or the Earth-origin genomes were checked and found none. Furthermore, mutation (indels and substitutions) analyses were carried out that were specific to the ISS clades. The amino acid substitutions that changed a hydrophobic amino acid into a hydrophilic one or vice versa were checked and found many changes. The genes affected by these changes were analyzed in terms of Gene Ontology classifications (Biological Process only; Supplementary Fig. S[3](#MOESM1)). The two ISS-specific clades of the _S. aureus_ tree allowed us to compare the two clades in terms of indels. There were 63 indels found to be shared by both clades of _S. aureus_, as opposed to 14 indels specific to clade 1 and 57 specific to clade 2. The GO analysis of the genes affected by the 63 shared indels resulted in 10 GO terms (Supplementary Fig. S[4](#MOESM1)).

Many of the GO terms with high frequency that resulted from these analyses are related to cell membranes, such as transmembrane transport, cell wall organization, and regulation of cell shape. This is consistent with previous reports regarding the effects of microgravity on cellular morphology, proliferation, and adhesion \[[43](#CR43)\]. Taken together, the present results exhibit strong evidence for ISS-specific bacterial evolution.

### Gene-based functional analysis

Variations in the AMR and virulence genes of the selected 20 MAGs have been summarized in Supplemental Table S[1](#MOESM2). Since multiple studies show that the microbial virulence increases in microgravity \[[44](#CR44), [45](#CR45)\], AMR gene sequences of MAGs were compared with genomes of type strains and ISS isolates \[[46](#CR46), [47](#CR47)\]. Among these 20 MAGs characterized, AMR genes were more prevalent in the _E. bugandensis_ F1-2P MAG, whereas these were not present in the other MAGs of BSL-2 microorganisms studied during this study.

MAGs were further used to analyze if genes involved in AMR and biofilm formation of viable microbes in the ISS have variation due to generational evolution in microgravity and radiation pressure. Comparative analyses of MAG and WGS of related ISS isolates and their type strains were characterized to understand the variation related to microbial evolution under microgravity. Among 20 MAGs processed, 13 AMR genes were found to be the most prominent among the bacteria (Table [3](#Tab3)). These 13 genes were housekeeping genes and have a unique, specialized role determined by their protein type and function. For example, the LSU ribosomal unit is the primary site where protein synthesis occurs in the translation process. Other genes include copper translocating P-type ATPase, DNA gyrase subunits A and B, LSU ribosomal unit 20p and 35p, SSU ribosomal unit 7p, and 12p, DNA-directed RNA polymerase beta subunit, topoisomerase IV subunits A and B, translation initiation factor 3, translation elongation factor Tu (EF-Tu), and translation elongation factor G (EF-G). Functions of genes characterized during this study are given in Supplemental Table S[2](#MOESM2). Single-nucleotide variation (SNV) among these 13 housekeeping genes in MAGs of six different bacterial species are summarized below.

#### Table 3.

Dominant antimicrobial resistance genes identified in ISS-MAGs

|  | The presence/absence of antimicrobial resistance genes that is as follows: |
| --- | --- |
| Sample | Species identified | Copper-translocating P-type ATPase | DNA gyrase subunit A | DNA gyrase subunit B | DNA-directed RNA polymerase beta subunit | Topoisomerase IV subunit A | Topoisomerase IV subunit B | LSU ribosomal protein L20p | LSU ribosomal protein L35p | SSU ribosomal protein S7p (S5e) | SSU ribosomal protein S7p (S5e) | Translation elongation factor G | Translation elongation factor Tu | Translation initiation factor 3 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| F1-2P | _Enterobacter bugandensis_ | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + |  |  |  |  | + |
| F1-4P | _Staphylococcus aureus_ | + | + | + | + | + | ++ |  | + | + | + | + | + | + |
| F1-5P | _Pantoea conspicua_ | + | + | + | + | + | + | ++ | + | + | + | + | + | + |
| F1-8P | _Microbacterium hominis_ | ++ | ++ | + | + | + | + |  |  | + | + | + | + |  |
| F2-1P | _Acinetobacter pittii_ | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + |
| F2-1P | _Kocuria palustris_ | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + |
| F2-2P | _Staphylococcus saprophyticus_ | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + |
| F2-5P | _Paenibacillus polymyxa_ | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + |
| F2-5P | _Pantoea conspicua_ | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + |
| F2-7P | _Methylobacterium ajmalii_ | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + |
| F2-7P | _Sphingomonas sanguinis_ | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + |
| F2-8P | _Paenibacillus polymyxa_ | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + |
| F2-8P | _Staphylococcus aureus_ | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + |
| F3-1P | _Kalamiella piersonii_ | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + |
| F3-2P | _Staphylococcus saprophyticus_ | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + |
| F3-3P | _Klebsiella pneumoniae_ | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + |
| F3-4P | _Pantoea dispersa_ |  |  |  |  |  | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + |
| F3-5P | _Kalamiella piersonii_ | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + |
| F3-7P | _Kalamiella piersonii_ | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + |
| F3-8P | _Kalamiella piersonii_ | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + | + |

Annotated genes identified for various subsystems in 20 selected MAGs are presented in Table [4](#Tab4). The subsystem features include genes responsible for various metabolisms, in which genes responsible for carbohydrates and amino acids metabolism were high. Genes related to motility and chemotaxis were absent in the members of the genera _Acinetobacter_, _Kocuria_, _Staphylococcus_, and _Klebsiella_. In contrast, genes associated with stress response were present in high numbers (90 to 167 genes) within members of family Enterobacteriaceae, whereas such genes were less abundant (19 to 75 genes) with _Staphylococcus_ and actinobacterial species. Similarly, sporulation and dormancy genes were mainly present in _Paenibacillus polymyxa_, since they are the only spore-forming bacterium MAG found.

#### Table 4.

Annotated genes identified for various subsystems in metagenome-assembled genomes

|  | Number of annotated genes in the microorganisms that are as follows: |
| --- | --- |
| **Subsystem feature** | **_Enterobacter bugandensis_** | **_Staphylococcus aureus_** | **_Pantoea conspicua_** | **_Microbacterium hominis_** | **_Acinetobacter pittii_** | **_Kocuria palustris_** | **_Staphylococcus saprophyticus_** | **_Paenibacillus polymyxa_** | **_Pantoea conspicua_** | **_Methylobacterium ajmalii_** |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | **F1-2P** | **F1-4P** | **F1-5P** | **F1-8P** | **F2-1P** | **F2-1P** | **F2-2P** | **F2-5P** | **F2-5P** | **F2-7P** |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Carbohydrates | 614 | 177 | 388 |  | 213 | 224 | 216 | 351 | 365 | 254 |
| Amino acids and derivatives | 473 | 286 | 392 | 256 | 350 | 290 | 308 | 296 | 377 | 485 |
| Cofactors, vitamins, prosthetic groups, pigments | 268 | 123 | 178 | 120 | 175 | 167 | 104 | 131 | 172 | 210 |
| Protein metabolism | 263 | 94 | 211 | 134 | 207 | 198 | 167 | 182 | 204 | 217 |
| Membrane transport | 238 | 61 | 106 | 73 | 107 | 30 | 36 | 56 | 105 | 160 |
| RNA metabolism | 232 | 34 | 59 | 31 | 56 | 24 | 40 | 58 | 59 | 40 |
| Cell wall and capsule | 220 | 42 | 42 | 20 | 24 | 10 | 36 | 87 | 42 | 27 |
| Stress response | 167 | 30 | 100 | 19 | 71 | 25 | 33 | 36 | 101 | 75 |
| Regulation and cell signaling | 153 | 34 | 66 | 13 | 46 | 11 | 47 | 27 | 66 | 55 |
| Respiration | 149 | 20 | 117 | 46 | 86 | 35 | 19 | 35 | 104 | 155 |
| Fatty acids, lipids, and isoprenoids | 133 | 58 | 72 | 42 | 130 | 85 | 62 | 77 | 71 | 115 |
| DNA metabolism | 130 | 64 | 97 | 62 | 72 | 54 | 71 | 84 | 97 | 95 |
| Nucleosides and nucleotides | 113 | 78 | 116 | 87 | 76 | 61 | 76 | 112 | 107 | 93 |
| Virulence, disease, and defense | 101 | 118 | 74 | 39 | 71 | 38 | 46 | 63 | 73 | 99 |
| Motility and chemotaxis | 96 |  | 100 |  |  |  |  | 42 | 100 | 93 |
| Sulfur metabolism | 65 | 11 | 34 | 4 | 44 | 20 | 7 | 10 | 34 | 39 |
| Iron acquisition and metabolism | 54 | 69 | 28 | 3 | 2 | 4 | 28 | 29 | 28 |  |
| Phosphorus metabolism | 47 | 23 | 43 | 35 | 36 | 25 | 30 | 49 | 43 | 39 |
| Nitrogen metabolism | 44 | 36 | 31 | 7 | 9 | 26 | 10 | 24 | 31 | 15 |
| Metabolism of aromatic compounds | 40 | 3 | 9 | 12 | 76 | 23 | 5 | 4 | 9 | 58 |
| Cell division and cell cycle | 39 | 4 | 8 |  | 2 | 6 | 5 | 3 | 8 | 2 |
| Miscellaneous | 35 | 11 | 16 | 25 | 41 | 36 | 12 | 15 | 16 | 17 |
| Potassium metabolism | 30 | 5 | 13 | 4 | 11 | 2 | 2 | 5 | 13 | 10 |
| Dormancy and sporulation | 3 | 8 | 4 | 1 | 2 | 2 | 13 | 38 | 4 | 1 |
| _Secondary metabolism_ |  | _5_ | _5_ | _11_ | _7_ | _4_ | _4_ | _6_ | _5_ | _5_ |

|  | Number of annotated genes in the microorganisms that are as follows: |
| --- | --- |
| **Subsystem feature** | **_Sphingomonas sanguinis_** | **_Paenibacillus polymyxa_** | **_Staphylococcus aureus_** | **_Kalamiella piersonii_** | **_Staphylococcus saprophyticus_** | **_Klebsiella pneumoniae_** | **_Pantoea dispersa_** | **_Kalamiella piersonii_** | **_Kalamiella piersonii_** | **_Kalamiella piersonii_** |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | **F2-7P** | **F2-8P** | **F2-8P** | **F3-1P** | **F3-2P** | **F3-3P** | **F3-4P** | **F3-5P** | **F3-7P** | **F3-8P** |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Carbohydrates | 233 | 351 | 177 | 521 | 221 | 498 | 327 | 352 | 350 | 378 |
| Amino acids and derivatives | 247 | 296 | 269 | 557 | 310 | 476 | 398 | 390 | 391 | 421 |
| Cofactors, vitamins, prosthetic groups, pigments | 170 | 129 | 119 | 256 | 98 | 221 | 170 | 175 | 147 | 182 |
| Protein metabolism | 190 | 180 | 143 | 275 | 68 | 196 | 208 | 199 | 217 | 186 |
| Membrane transport | 138 | 57 | 44 | 124 | 35 | 115 | 135 | 114 | 96 | 122 |
| RNA metabolism | 38 | 61 | 37 | 88 | 40 | 59 | 61 | 59 | 64 | 66 |
| Cell wall and capsule | 26 | 87 | 37 | 60 | 31 | 45 | 51 | 50 | 51 | 54 |
| Stress response | 61 | 37 | 32 | 124 | 33 | 104 | 90 | 97 | 98 | 101 |
| Regulation and cell signaling | 26 | 25 | 28 | 97 | 39 | 91 | 73 | 72 | 71 | 76 |
| Respiration | 116 | 36 | 18 | 141 | 18 | 125 | 101 | 101 | 97 | 110 |
| Fatty acids, lipids, and isoprenoids | 64 | 76 | 57 | 72 | 61 | 65 | 102 | 59 | 59 | 61 |
| DNA metabolism | 77 | 85 | 63 | 114 | 73 | 86 | 87 | 82 | 87 | 84 |
| Nucleosides and nucleotides | 51 | 111 | 83 | 134 | 80 | 93 | 89 | 95 | 95 | 113 |
| Virulence, disease, and defense | 120 | 62 | 63 | 80 | 47 | 66 | 53 | 61 | 73 | 69 |
| Motility and chemotaxis | 23 | 43 |  | 62 |  |  | 66 | 57 | 56 | 57 |
| Sulfur metabolism | 6 | 11 | 10 | 49 | 7 | 44 | 46 | 37 | 39 | 38 |
| Iron acquisition and metabolism | 2 | 29 | 50 | 52 | 25 | 52 | 29 | 38 | 37 | 36 |
| Phosphorus metabolism | 50 | 49 | 20 | 74 | 33 | 45 | 41 | 47 | 46 | 60 |
| Nitrogen metabolism | 11 | 24 | 18 | 44 | 10 | 40 | 25 | 28 | 27 | 28 |
| Metabolism of aromatic compounds | 26 | 4 | 3 | 18 | 5 | 70 | 13 | 17 | 17 | 17 |
| Cell division and cell cycle |  | 3 | 5 | 9 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 |
| Miscellaneous | 24 | 15 | 11 | 20 | 11 | 32 | 15 | 16 | 16 | 19 |
| Potassium metabolism | 10 | 5 | 6 | 17 | 2 | 15 | 15 | 13 | 13 | 13 |
| Dormancy and sporulation | 1 | 38 | 8 | 4 | 8 | 3 | 2 | 4 | 4 | 5 |
| _Secondary metabolism_ | _5_ | _6_ | _4_ | _5_ | _4_ | _5_ | _4_ | _4_ | _4_ | _4_ |

#### Copper translocating P-type ATPase

To observe positional sequence variation in the copper translocating P-type ATPase, the _E. bugandensis_ F1-2P MAG was compared with the type strain EB-247T, which is a nosocomial pathogen isolated from human blood and found sequence variation. Likewise, MAGs of _Pseudomonas brenneri_ (F1-5P and F2-5P) and _Pantoea dispersa_ (F3-4P) had positional variation compared to their type strains (LMG 24534T and DSM 30073T, respectively). In contrast, no sequence variation in the copper translocating P-type ATPase was noticed when analyzing the WGS of the _S. aureus_ ATCC12600T type strain, a nosocomial isolate, and _S. aureus_ MAGs (F1-4P and F2-8P). Similarly, _K. pneumoniae_ MAG F3-3P had no SNVs compared to its type strain ATCC 13883T. _Acinetobacter pittii_ F2-1P MAG had maximum similarity of copper translocating P-type ATPase sequence with not only its type strain DSM 25618T but also with _Acinetobacter baumannii_ DSM 30007T which was isolated from human urine. WGS of the novel species _K. piersonii_, whose type strain IIIF1SW-P2T was also isolated from location no. 1 of the ISS \[[7](#CR7)\], was compared with the MAGs (F3-1P, F3-5P, F3-7P, and F3-8P). This comparison exhibited the same genetic composition, which confirms that the MAGs might have originated from the living cells. In addition, the comparative genomic analysis of the uropathogenic strain of _K. piersonii_ strain YU22, isolated from human urine \[[48](#CR48)\], revealed no SNVs.

#### DNA gyrase subunit A

To observe positional sequence variation in the DNA gyrase subunit A, _S. aureus_ MAG F2-8P was compared with the genomes of the type strain ATCC 12600T, isolated from pleural fluid, and most SNPs were found. However, _S. aureus_ MAG F1-4P was highly homologous with the type strain ATCC 12600T. In addition, _S. aureus_ MAG F2-8P and AR071, a nosocomial strain that is part of the FDA/CDC AMR bank, also showed mutations. Similarly, _E. bugandensis_ F1-2P had SNPs found in its counterpart type strain EB-247T. _A. pittii_ had alignment differences in strain _A. pittii_ XJ88, which was found in human sputum which is a mixture of saliva and mucus. _P. brenneri_ MAGs (F1-5P and F2-5P) as well as _K. personii_ MAGs (F3-5P, F3-8P, and F3-7P) have SNPs with its type strain. The remainder of the _Pantoea_ strains was found to have scattered SNPs among Earth homologs. In contrast, _K. quasipneumoniae_ MAG F1-2P had no SNPs found with its type strain 01A030T, a human blood isolate. _K. pneumoniae_ MAG F3-3P had nucleotide differences with NCTC 11357 sequences.

#### DNA gyrase subunit B

_S. aureus_ MAGs (F1-4P and F2-8P) had SNPs in _S. aureus_ ATCC12600T. _E. bugandensis_ MAG F1-2P has SNPs found in _E. quasihormaechei_ WCHes120003T which was isolated from a human sputum \[[49](#CR49)\] and its type strain as well. _A. pittii_ had many scattered SNPs among the Earth homolog. _K. pneumoniae_ MAG F3-3P did not have distinct point mutations.

#### DNA-directed RNA polymerase beta subunit

_S. aureus_ MAGs (F1-4P and F2-8P) have SNPs found in ATCC 12600, which has already been explained to be a nosocomial strain. _E. bugandensis_ F1-2P and Earth homolog _Enterobacter cloacae_ complex C45, isolated from a hospital, have point mutations. _K. pneumoniae_ F3-3P had SNPs found in _K. pneumoniae_ NCTC 9170. _P. dispersa_ F3-4P was the only strain that had scattered SNPs in the _Pantoea_ species. _Acinetobacter_ alignment had SNPs found in _Acinetobacter_ sp. genomospecies 3 ATCC 19004 which was isolated from cerebrospinal fluid.

#### LSU ribosomal protein L20p

_S. aureus_ F1-4P and F2-8P MAGs had no SNPs with the type strain. Strain _S. aureus_ GD1108 which is a hospital strain is the same as that of ISS F1-4P and F2-8P MAGs. _S. aureus_ F2-8P ISS strain was very dissimilar to the rest of the _S. aureus_ MAG sequences. Both _E. bugandensis_ and _Klebsiella_ MAGs have no SNPs. The _Pantoea_ MAGs have SNPs found in _Plautia stali_ (insect) symbiont, _P. vagans_ C9-1, and _P. stewartii_ DC 283. One SNP was found in strain XJ88 in the _Acinetobacter_ (F2-1P) alignment.

#### LSU ribosomal protein L35p

No SNPs were found in all _S. aureus_ strains. SNPs were not found in both _Enterobacter_ and _Klebsiella_ MAGs. _P. brenneri_ MAGs (F1A-5P and F2-5P) have no SNPs. _Acinetobacter_ had no SNPs found. _K. piersonii_ MAGs (F3-1P and F3-7P) have SNPs in _Pantoea_ sp. O10 that was isolated from the soil. _P. dispersa_ F3-4P has SNPs in _P. rwandensis ND04_ (waterfall isolate).

#### SSU ribosomal protein S12p

_S. aureus_ MAGs (F1-4P and F2-8P) have SNPs in GD1108. _P. brenneri_ MAGs (F1-5P and F2-5P) and _K. personii_ MAGs (F3-1P, F3-5P, F3-7P, and F3-8P) have SNPs in strain LMG 24199. _P. dispersa_ F3-4P had one SNP found when compared to Earth homolog. _Enterobacter_ F1-1P and _Klebsiella_ MAGs had no SNPs. The _Acinetobacter_ alignment had no SNPs found.

#### SSU ribosomal protein S7p

_S. aureus_ MAGs (F1-4P and F2-8P) have SNPs found in their Earth analogs. _P. brenneri_ (F1-5P and F2-5P) as well as _K. piersonii_ (F3-1P) have SNPs found in LMG24199. _P. dispersa_ F3-4P had three SNPs found in the ISS strain. _K. piersonii_ MAGs (F3-5P, F3-7P, and F3-8P) had differences found in _Pantoea vagans_ FBS135_._ This strain was from a Masson’s pine isolation source. _Enterobacter_ F1-1P and _Klebsiella_ have no SNPs found. No SNPs were found in _A. pittii_.

#### Topoisomerase IV subunit A

_S. aureus_ MAGs (F1-4P and F2-8P) had SNPs found in ATCC 12600. _A. pittii_ MAG was extremely different from the rest of the alignment. _E. bugandensis_ F1-2P had scattered SNPs. _K. pneumoniae_ F3-3P had SNPs found in strain ATCC 700603. _P. brenneri_ F2-5P and _K. piersonii_ F3-1P had SNPs found in _P. agglomerans_ FDAARGOS 160 which was isolated from a human wound isolation source. _P. dispersa_ F3-4P and _K. piersonii_ F3-7P have no SNPs.

#### Topoisomerase IV subunit B

_S. aureus_ F1-4P have no SNPs, but MAG F2-8P had SNPs found in strain AR071 and GD1696. _E. bugandensis_ F1-2P MAG was extremely different compared to the rest of the type strain EB-247. _P. brenneri_ MAGs (F1-5P and F2-5P) had SNPs found in LMG24199. Other _Pantoea_ strains have SNPs primarily found with their respective type strains. _K. piersonii_ MAGs (F3-7P and F3-8P) have SNPs found in _Pantoea agglomerans_ TH81. _A. pittii_ F2-1P had SNPs found in IEC338SC which was isolated from a trachea excretion.

#### Translation initiation factor 3

_S. aureus_ MAG F1-4P have had sequences that were very different from its Earth homologs, but there were no SNPs were found in _S. aureus_ F2-8P MAG. _K. piersonii_ F3-8P had scattered SNPs, whereas MAG F3-7P and _P. dispersa_ F3-4P have SNPs in _Plautia stali_ symbiont which was collected from the midgut of an insect. All other _Pantoea_ MAGs do not have SNPs. The _A. pittii_ alignment was found to have SNPs in the strain 201406 which was isolated from human. Both _Enterobacter_ and _Klebsiella_ species had no nucleotide differences.

#### Translation elongation factor G

_S. aureus_ MAGs (F1-4P and F2-8P) have SNPs found in _S. aureus_ AR 464. _E. bugandensis_ F1-1P has SNPs in _Enterobacter_ MBRL1077 which was isolated from a human wound. SNPs were not particular to one _Klebsiella_ strain. _K. piersonii_ MAGs (F3-1P, F3-5P, F3-7P, and F3-8P) and _P. dispersa_ F3-4P have SNPs with their respective type strains. There were no SNPs found in _K. pneumoniae_ F3-3P, but SNPs were found in _A. pittii_ F2-1P with strain ST220 which was retrieved from sputum. _P. brenneri_ F2-5P has no SNPs.

#### Translation elongation factor Tu

_S. aureus_ F2-8P had SNPs found in strain AR071, and the rest of the _S. aureus_ F1-4P MAG has SNPs in ATCC 12600. _E. bugandensis_ F1-2P had scattered SNPs, but _Klebsiella_ strains have no SNPs. _P. brenneri_ F2-5P and _K. piersonii_ MAGs (F3-1P and F3-7P) have SNPs when compared to the type strain. _K. piersonii_ F3-5P had SNPs found in _Pantoea stewartii_ strain DC283, whereas _K. piersonii_ MAG F3-8P did not have any SNPs. _P. dispersa_ MAG F3-4P has SNPs in _Pantoea rwandensis_ strain ND04. _A. pittii_ was extremely dissimilar to its type strain.

Many SNPs found in these 333 alignments have been found in the Earth homologs. The _Pantoea/Kalamiella_ strains have the most SNPs found within the ISS strain. This may suggest that _Pantoea/Kalamiella_ strains are much more subjective to microgravity changes. More epigenetic and chemical analyses are needed to understand why members of these species are particularly sensitive to these conditions. The difference may also lie in the low percent identity the Earth homologs had. In regards to the _Staphylococcus_ strains, ATCC12600 and GD1108 are both nosocomial strains which seem to act differently in each gene. For example, in some genes, ATCC12600 exhibits SNPs, while GD1108 is the only Earth homolog that has the exact same sequence as the ISS strain. Strain GD1108 was isolated from a school child from a prevalence survey in 2011 in Guangzhou, People’s Republic of China \[[50](#CR50)\]. Common SNPs were not found between the ISS and homolog strains within alignments. SNPs in Earth homologs symbolize differences in where the strain was found from. For example, Earth homologs that are found in soil exhibit very different sequences with the ISS strain, therefore explaining the SNPs. In addition, most SNPs have been found in human fluids as well as soil/plants with a few animal excretions. This demonstrates that the ISS strain has some nosocomial/soil background in relation to the rest of the alignment. Strains that are similar/dissimilar to the ISS strain show no common isolation source for the most part. Therefore, more biochemical analyses on the molecular level are needed. In MAG gene analysis (Supplemental Table S[1](#MOESM2)), it was observed that similar genes were responsible for antibiotic resistance and virulence. This common gene-based resistant phenomenon suggests that changes are an adaptation strategy in microbes.

### Genes related to biofilm characteristics

Biofilm forming and quorum-sensing (QS) genes analyzed in this study and their predicted functions are tabulated in Supplemental Table S[2](#MOESM2). Sequences of all four _E. bungandensis_ ISS strains and the MAG (F1-2P) exhibited 100% sequence similarities among them for the genes responsible for biofilm (_pgaABCD_) and QS (_LsrABCD_, _LsrR_, _LsrK_, and _AI-LuxS_) functions. The variable residues (SNPs) of genes related to biofilm formation and QS-related genes in _E. bungandensis_ MAG when compared to _E. bugandensis_ strains (_n_ = 11) isolated from clinical samples are given in Table [5](#Tab5). The comparative sequence analysis of _E. bugandensis_ MAG shows that the biofilm and QS genes are highly conserved (< 1% SNPs variation) across most of the clinical strains of _E. bugandensis_ (_n_ = 10). This pattern is also consistent with the neighbor-joining tree of each one of these genes for all the strains tested and one MAG (data not shown). These analyses confirmed that _E. bugandensis_ strains might have hitch-hiked with the healthy crew and landed on ISS surfaces. In contrast, the sequence variation of all biofilm and QS genes of _E. bugandensis_ strain MBRL 1077 was highly variable (2.4 to 25%). The average nucleic acid index (ANI) of MBRL 1077 and the _E. bugandensis_ type strain EB-247 were ~95%, whereas the ANI was > 99% for the other 10 clinical strains, four ISS isolates, and one MAG. The higher SNPs and lower ANI values of MBRL 1077 strain with all other 14 strains and one MAG suggested that MBRL 1077 might not belong to _E. bugandensis._

#### Table 5.

Differential characteristics of biofilm and quorum sensing-related genes in ISS _Enterobacter bungandensis_ (_n_ = 4) and F1-2P MAG (_n_ = 1) when compared to other related strains

| Gene name | Types of residue | Size (bp) | Number of variable residues in genes responsible for biofilm formation and quorum sensing in ISS _Enterobacter bugandensis_ strains and MAG when compared to other related strains (GenBank accession no) that are as follows: |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| EB-247 1 [NZ\_JZZB01000066.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NZ_JZZB01000066.1) | [GN035669](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/GN035669) | GN02548 [NZ\_LEDQ01000032.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NZ_LEDQ01000032.1) | GN02283 [NZ\_LEEJ01000039.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NZ_LEEJ01000039.1) | GN04787 [NZ\_LVTS01000001.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NZ_LVTS01000001.1) NZ | GN03842 [NZ\_LRCL01000001.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NZ_LRCL01000001.1) | GN05729 [NZ\_LRCV01000001.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NZ_LRCV01000001.1) | MNCRE4 [NZ\_JZDF01000007.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NZ_JZDF01000007.1) [NZ\_LRCV01000001.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NZ_LRCV01000001.1) | IIT-BT-08 1 [NZ\_KI911561.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NZ_KI911561.1) | MBRL 1077 [NZ\_CP014280.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NZ_CP014280.1) N | 153 ECLO [NZ\_JVSD01000020.1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NZ_JVSD01000020.1) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| _zLsrA_ | Nucleotide | 1488 | NA | 25 | 4 | 33 | 27 | 32 | 27 | 35 | 30 | 156 | 21 |
| Amino acid | 495 | NA | 3 | 0 | 7 | 3 | 4 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 22 | 1 |
| _LsrB_ | Nucleotide | 1002 | 11 | 18 | 18 | 25 | 11 | 30 | 28 | 22 | 19 | 65 | 8 |
| Amino acid | 333 | 1 | 1 | 0 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 7 | 0 |
| _LsrC_ | Nucleotide | 1032 | 23 | 16 | 23 | 90 | 19 | 91 | 21 | 59 | 32 | 85 | 22 |
| Amino acid | 343 | 2 | 4 | 3 | 16 | 2 | 16 | 2 | 8 | 4 | 16 | 2 |
| _LsrD_ | Nucleotide | 978 | 1 | 17 | 3 | 67 | 12 | 31 | 13 | 29 | 12 | 83 | 3 |
| Amino acid | 325 | 0 | 3 | 0 | 8 | 2 | 3 | 1 | 2 | 1 | 11 | 0 |
| _LsrF_ | Nucleotide | 888 | 31 | 24 | 29 | 17 | 23 | 47 | 25 | 20 | 27 | 66 | 32 |
| Amino acid | 295 | 2 | 2 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 2 | 2 | 1 | 1 | 12 | 1 |
| _LsrG_ | Nucleotide | 294 | 11 | 10 | 10 | 21 | 8 | NA | 16 | 98 | 12 | 16 | 5 |
| Amino acid | 97 | 2 | 3 | 1 | 0 | 1 | NA | 3 | 0 | 2 | 2 | 2 |
| _LsrR_ | Nucleotide | 972 | 22 | 21 | 9 | 51 | 20 | 23 | 22 | 68 | 34 | 58 | 23 |
| Amino acid | 323 | 2 | 1 | 0 | 5 | 1 | 2 | 2 | 5 | 2 | 1 | 1 |
| _LsrK_ | Nucleotide | 1581 | 28 | 26 | 23 | 75 | 12 | 42 | 26 | 52 | 16 | 132 | 26 |
| Amino acid | 526 | 4 | 3 | 2 | 12 | 1 | 10 | 3 | 6 | 1 | 20 | 5 |
| _AI-luxS_ | Nucleotide | 576 | 4 | 5 | 3 | 5 | 4 | 6 | 6 | 4 | 5 | 15 | 4 |
| Amino acid | 171 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| _PgaA_ | Nucleotide | 2439 | 30 | 24 | 30 | 31 | 30 | 45 | 29 | NA | 34 | 97 | 22 |
| Amino acid | 812 | 13 | 13 | 12 | 15 | 12 | 23 | 14 | NA | 14 | 35 | 13 |
| _PgaB_ | Nucleotide | 1938 | 31 | 32 | 28 | 30 | 29 | 46 | 13 | 30 | 15 | 83 | 11 |
| Amino acid | 645 | 7 | 9 | 7 | 6 | 8 | 11 | 4 | 8 | 2 | 18 | 1 |
| _PgaC_ | Nucleotide | 1332 | 14 | 13 | 15 | 11 | 16 | 15 | 26 | 11 | 14 | 32 | 14 |
| Amino acid | 443 | 0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 2 | 2 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 4 |
| _PgaD_ | Nucleotide | 435 | 2 | 2 | 4 | 2 | 2 | 3 | 0 | 4 | 4 | 14 | 1 |
| Amino acid | 144 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 0 |

NA indicates that the FASTA data for that gene in that specific strain was not found in any database

These SNPs analysis results were also supportive of the function of the genes, e.g., the _AI-luxS_ gene had nucleotide mutations; however, none of these nucleotide mutations led to a change of amino acid. This result is interesting because this gene codes for the autoinducer proteins which are very important for carrying signals \[[51](#CR51)\]. In that regard, environmental stress would have no effect on that gene since a change in the gene sequence would not serve to increase the rate of biofilm production and increase the overall amount of biofilm formed, but we can also see that there is a decent amount of amino acid change in the _LsrC_ gene which is responsible for importing the autoinducer, and this makes sense because while the autoinducer itself does not need to be changed, the rate at which it is imported to carry information needs to be increased or reduced to accommodate for the change in the amount of biofilm produced. On the other hand, changes in the nucleotide sequence of the _pgaA_ and _pgaB_ genes, along with the _LsrK_ gene, lead to high amino acid change. This could serve as a strong indication of these organisms trying to adjust to the environmental stress because the _pgaA_ and _pgaB_ are responsible for transporting the PGA essential in the movement of adhesin out of the periplasm to form the biofilm. Also, the _LsrK_ is responsible for repressing the _LsrR_ repressor, and increasing the function of all three genes will aid in increased signal for biofilm to be formed faster, as well as increase the rate of biofilm formation.

## Conclusion

In summary, good quality bacterial and fungal MAGs were generated from ISS environmental samples, and functional properties were predicted. Furthermore, it was possible to describe novel microbial (two bacterial and one yeast) species via the “metagenome to phenome” approach. The monophyletic phylogeny exhibited by the ISS genomes (both isolates and MAGs) suggested that they shared a single common ancestor. The molecules pertaining to the cell membranes, such as transmembrane transport, cell wall organization, and regulation of cell shape, were in high frequency in ISS genomes demonstrating evidence for ISS-specific bacterial evolution. The common gene-based resistance phenomenon noticed in this study suggests that SNP changes in MAGs and ISS genomes might be an adaptation strategy in AMR and biofilm formation in microbes. Similarly, variations found in the AMR and virulence genes enabled the prediction of the ecology and evolution of microorganisms in space. The maximum SNPs characterized for the ISS _Pantoea/Kalamiella_ strains suggested that enterobacterial species are much more subjective to microgravity changes. However, fixation of environmental samples in space for RNAseq approach and/or in situ sequencing in space are warranted to confirm variation related to microbial evolution under microgravity. More studies are needed to unearth whether SNPs seen in ISS MAGs are due to generational evolution in microgravity and radiation pressure.

## Supplementary Information

## Acknowledgements

The © 2022 California Institute of Technology. Government sponsorship was acknowledged.

## Authors’ contributions

NKS and KV formulated, designed, and executed the study. NKS and KV characterized the whole-genome sequence-based comparative analyses of the MAGs. NKS, JP, and JCS generated the genomes from the metagenome sequences. NKS and JMW performed analysis of the de novo assemblies, including contig alignment, and annotation checks. JW and NKS executed the functional pathway analyses of the MAGs. JW performed MLST analyses for all the MAGs. JP, LMSM, and JCS performed the robust phylogenetic analyses of the MAG. JL performed BRIG-based analysis of MAGS. All authors contributed in writing the manuscript. The authors read and approved the final manuscript.

## Funding

Part of the research described in this publication was carried out at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under a contract with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. This research was funded by a 2012 Space Biology NNH12ZTT001N grant no. 19-12829-26 under Task Order NNN13D111T award to KV, which also funded the postdoctoral fellowships for NKS and JMW.

## Availability of data and materials

The data described in this manuscript can be freely and openly accessed on NCBI Short Read Archive under the bio-project number PRJNA438545.

## Declarations

### Ethics approval and consent to participate

Since all data presented in this manuscript are generated from the environmental samples, ethics approval and consent to participate by human subjects are not needed.

### Consent for publication

Not applicable

### Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

## Footnotes

**Publisher’s Note**

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

## Contributor Information

Nitin K. Singh, Email: nitin.k.singh@jpl.nasa.gov

Jason M. Wood, Email: woodinsitu@gmail.com

Jose Patane, Email: jspatane@gmail.com.

Livia Maria Silva Moura, Email: liviam.moura@gmail.com.

Jonathan Lombardino, Email: jlombardino@wisc.edu.

João Carlos Setubal, Email: setubal@iq.usp.br.

Kasthuri Venkateswaran, Email: kjvenkat@jpl.nasa.gov.

## References

*   1.Tyson GW, Chapman J, Hugenholtz P, Allen EE, Ram RJ, Richardson PM, Solovyev VV, Rubin EM, Rokhsar DS, Banfield JF. Community structure and metabolism through reconstruction of microbial genomes from the environment. Nature. 2004;428:37–43. doi: 10.1038/nature02340. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature02340)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14961025/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nature&title=Community%20structure%20and%20metabolism%20through%20reconstruction%20of%20microbial%20genomes%20from%20the%20environment&author=GW%20Tyson&author=J%20Chapman&author=P%20Hugenholtz&author=EE%20Allen&author=RJ%20Ram&volume=428&publication_year=2004&pages=37-43&pmid=14961025&doi=10.1038/nature02340&)\]
*   2.Quince C, Walker AW, Simpson JT, Loman NJ, Segata N. Shotgun metagenomics, from sampling to analysis. Nat Biotechnol. 2017;35:833–844. doi: 10.1038/nbt.3935. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.3935)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28898207/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Biotechnol&title=Shotgun%20metagenomics,%20from%20sampling%20to%20analysis&author=C%20Quince&author=AW%20Walker&author=JT%20Simpson&author=NJ%20Loman&author=N%20Segata&volume=35&publication_year=2017&pages=833-844&pmid=28898207&doi=10.1038/nbt.3935&)\]
*   3.Wang WL, Xu SY, Ren ZG, Tao L, Jiang JW, Zheng SS. Application of metagenomics in the human gut microbiome. World J Gastroenterol. 2015;21:803–14. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v21.i3.803. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v21.i3.803)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4299332/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25624713/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=World%20J%20Gastroenterol&title=Application%20of%20metagenomics%20in%20the%20human%20gut%20microbiome&author=WL%20Wang&author=SY%20Xu&author=ZG%20Ren&author=L%20Tao&author=JW%20Jiang&volume=21&publication_year=2015&pages=803-14&pmid=25624713&doi=10.3748/wjg.v21.i3.803&)\]
*   4.Barnum TP, Figueroa IA, Carlström CI, Lucas LN, Engelbrektson AL, Coates JD. Genome-resolved metagenomics identifies genetic mobility, metabolic interactions, and unexpected diversity in perchlorate-reducing communities. The ISME Journal. 2018;12:1568–1581. doi: 10.1038/s41396-018-0081-5. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41396-018-0081-5)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5955982/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29476141/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=The%20ISME%20Journal&title=Genome-resolved%20metagenomics%20identifies%20genetic%20mobility,%20metabolic%20interactions,%20and%20unexpected%20diversity%20in%20perchlorate-reducing%20communities&author=TP%20Barnum&author=IA%20Figueroa&author=CI%20Carlstr%C3%B6m&author=LN%20Lucas&author=AL%20Engelbrektson&volume=12&publication_year=2018&pages=1568-1581&pmid=29476141&doi=10.1038/s41396-018-0081-5&)\]
*   5.Andersen MH, McIlroy SJ, Nierychlo M, Nielsen PH, Albertsen M. Genomic insights into Candidatus Amarolinea aalborgensis gen. nov., sp. nov., associated with settleability problems in wastewater treatment plants. Syst Appl Microbiol. 2019;42:77–84. doi: 10.1016/j.syapm.2018.08.001. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.syapm.2018.08.001)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30146409/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Syst%20Appl%20Microbiol&title=Genomic%20insights%20into%20Candidatus%20Amarolinea%20aalborgensis%20gen.%20nov.,%20sp.%20nov.,%20associated%20with%20settleability%20problems%20in%20wastewater%20treatment%20plants&author=MH%20Andersen&author=SJ%20McIlroy&author=M%20Nierychlo&author=PH%20Nielsen&author=M%20Albertsen&volume=42&publication_year=2019&pages=77-84&pmid=30146409&doi=10.1016/j.syapm.2018.08.001&)\]
*   6.Leon MJ, Fernandez AB, Ghai R, Sanchez-Porro C, Rodriguez-Valera F, Ventosa A. From metagenomics to pure culture: isolation and characterization of the moderately halophilic bacterium Spiribacter salinus gen. nov., sp. nov. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2014;80:3850–7. doi: 10.1128/AEM.00430-14. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.00430-14)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4054224/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24747894/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Appl%20Environ%20Microbiol&title=From%20metagenomics%20to%20pure%20culture:%20isolation%20and%20characterization%20of%20the%20moderately%20halophilic%20bacterium%20Spiribacter%20salinus%20gen.%20nov.,%20sp.%20nov&author=MJ%20Leon&author=AB%20Fernandez&author=R%20Ghai&author=C%20Sanchez-Porro&author=F%20Rodriguez-Valera&volume=80&publication_year=2014&pages=3850-7&pmid=24747894&doi=10.1128/AEM.00430-14&)\]
*   7.Singh NK, Wood JM, Mhatre SS, Venkateswaran K. Metagenome to phenome approach enables isolation and genomics characterization of Kalamiella piersonii gen. nov., sp. nov. from the International Space Station. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2019;103:4483–4497. doi: 10.1007/s00253-019-09813-z. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-019-09813-z)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31011775/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Appl%20Microbiol%20Biotechnol&title=Metagenome%20to%20phenome%20approach%20enables%20isolation%20and%20genomics%20characterization%20of%20Kalamiella%20piersonii%20gen.%20nov.,%20sp.%20nov.%20from%20the%20International%20Space%20Station&author=NK%20Singh&author=JM%20Wood&author=SS%20Mhatre&author=K%20Venkateswaran&volume=103&publication_year=2019&pages=4483-4497&pmid=31011775&doi=10.1007/s00253-019-09813-z&)\]
*   8.Cuadrat RRC, Ionescu D, Dávila AMR, Grossart HP. Recovering genomics clusters of secondary metabolites from lakes using genome-resolved metagenomics. Front Microbiol. 2018;9:251. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.00251. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2018.00251)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5826242/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29515540/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Front%20Microbiol&title=Recovering%20genomics%20clusters%20of%20secondary%20metabolites%20from%20lakes%20using%20genome-resolved%20metagenomics&author=RRC%20Cuadrat&author=D%20Ionescu&author=AMR%20D%C3%A1vila&author=HP%20Grossart&volume=9&publication_year=2018&pages=251&pmid=29515540&doi=10.3389/fmicb.2018.00251&)\]
*   9.Ward LM, Shih PM, Fischer WW. MetaPOAP: presence or absence of metabolic pathways in metagenome-assembled genomes. Bioinformatics. 2018;34:4284–4286. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bty510. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bty510)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29939199/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bioinformatics&title=MetaPOAP:%20presence%20or%20absence%20of%20metabolic%20pathways%20in%20metagenome-assembled%20genomes&author=LM%20Ward&author=PM%20Shih&author=WW%20Fischer&volume=34&publication_year=2018&pages=4284-4286&pmid=29939199&doi=10.1093/bioinformatics/bty510&)\]
*   10.Schulze-Makuch D, Wagner D, Kounaves SP, Mangelsdorf K, Devine KG, de Vera JP, Schmitt-Kopplin P, Grossart HP, Parro V, Kaupenjohann M, Galy A, Schneider B, Airo A, Frosler J, Davila AF, Arens FL, Caceres L, Cornejo FS, Carrizo D, Dartnell L, DiRuggiero J, Flury M, Ganzert L, Gessner MO, Grathwohl P, Guan L, Heinz J, Hess M, Keppler F, Maus D, McKay CP, Meckenstock RU, Montgomery W, Oberlin EA, Probst AJ, Saenz JS, Sattler T, Schirmack J, Sephton MA, Schloter M, Uhl J, Valenzuela B, Vestergaard G, Wormer L, Zamorano P. Transitory microbial habitat in the hyperarid atacama desert. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2018;115:2670–2675. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1714341115. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1714341115)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5856521/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29483268/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc%20Natl%20Acad%20Sci%20U%20S%20A&title=Transitory%20microbial%20habitat%20in%20the%20hyperarid%20atacama%20desert&author=D%20Schulze-Makuch&author=D%20Wagner&author=SP%20Kounaves&author=K%20Mangelsdorf&author=KG%20Devine&volume=115&publication_year=2018&pages=2670-2675&pmid=29483268&doi=10.1073/pnas.1714341115&)\]
*   11.Stewart RD, Auffret MD, Warr A, Wiser AH, Press MO, Langford KW, Liachko I, Snelling TJ, Dewhurst RJ, Walker AW, Roehe R, Watson M. Assembly of 913 microbial genomes from metagenomic sequencing of the cow rumen. Nat Commun. 2018;9:870. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-03317-6. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-03317-6)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5830445/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29491419/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Commun&title=Assembly%20of%20913%20microbial%20genomes%20from%20metagenomic%20sequencing%20of%20the%20cow%20rumen&author=RD%20Stewart&author=MD%20Auffret&author=A%20Warr&author=AH%20Wiser&author=MO%20Press&volume=9&publication_year=2018&pages=870&pmid=29491419&doi=10.1038/s41467-018-03317-6&)\]
*   12.Parks DH, Rinke C, Chuvochina M, Chaumeil P-A, Woodcroft BJ, Evans PN, Hugenholtz P, Tyson GW. Recovery of nearly 8,000 metagenome-assembled genomes substantially expands the tree of life. Nature Microbiology. 2017;2:1533–1542. doi: 10.1038/s41564-017-0012-7. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-017-0012-7)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28894102/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nature%20Microbiology&title=Recovery%20of%20nearly%208,000%20metagenome-assembled%20genomes%20substantially%20expands%20the%20tree%20of%20life&author=DH%20Parks&author=C%20Rinke&author=M%20Chuvochina&author=P-A%20Chaumeil&author=BJ%20Woodcroft&volume=2&publication_year=2017&pages=1533-1542&pmid=28894102&doi=10.1038/s41564-017-0012-7&)\]
*   13.Almeida A, Mitchell AL, Boland M, Forster SC, Gloor GB, Tarkowska A, Lawley TD, Finn RD. A new genomic blueprint of the human gut microbiota. Nature. 2019;568:499–504. doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-0965-1. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-0965-1)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6784870/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30745586/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nature&title=A%20new%20genomic%20blueprint%20of%20the%20human%20gut%20microbiota&author=A%20Almeida&author=AL%20Mitchell&author=M%20Boland&author=SC%20Forster&author=GB%20Gloor&volume=568&publication_year=2019&pages=499-504&pmid=30745586&doi=10.1038/s41586-019-0965-1&)\]
*   14.Singh NK, Wood JM, Karouia F, Venkateswaran K. Succession and persistence of microbial communities and antimicrobial resistance genes associated with International Space Station environmental surfaces. Microbiome. 2018;6:214. doi: 10.1186/s40168-018-0609-y. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-018-0609-y)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6280456/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30514368/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Microbiome&title=Succession%20and%20persistence%20of%20microbial%20communities%20and%20antimicrobial%20resistance%20genes%20associated%20with%20International%20Space%20Station%20environmental%20surfaces&author=NK%20Singh&author=JM%20Wood&author=F%20Karouia&author=K%20Venkateswaran&volume=6&publication_year=2018&pages=214&pmid=30514368&doi=10.1186/s40168-018-0609-y&)\]
*   15.Checinska Sielaff A, Urbaniak C, Mohan GBM, Stepanov VG, Tran Q, Wood JM, Minich J, McDonald D, Mayer T, Knight R, Karouia F, Fox GE, Venkateswaran K. Characterization of the total and viable bacterial and fungal communities associated with the International Space Station surfaces. Microbiome. 2019;7:50. doi: 10.1186/s40168-019-0666-x. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-019-0666-x)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6452512/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30955503/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Microbiome&title=Characterization%20of%20the%20total%20and%20viable%20bacterial%20and%20fungal%20communities%20associated%20with%20the%20International%20Space%20Station%20surfaces&author=A%20Checinska%20Sielaff&author=C%20Urbaniak&author=GBM%20Mohan&author=VG%20Stepanov&author=Q%20Tran&volume=7&publication_year=2019&pages=50&pmid=30955503&doi=10.1186/s40168-019-0666-x&)\]
*   16.Bolger AM, Lohse M, Usadel B. Trimmomatic: a flexible trimmer for Illumina sequence data. Bioinformatics. 2014;30:2114–2120. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btu170. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btu170)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4103590/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24695404/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bioinformatics&title=Trimmomatic:%20a%20flexible%20trimmer%20for%20Illumina%20sequence%20data&author=AM%20Bolger&author=M%20Lohse&author=B%20Usadel&volume=30&publication_year=2014&pages=2114-2120&pmid=24695404&doi=10.1093/bioinformatics/btu170&)\]
*   17.Nurk S, Meleshko D, Korobeynikov A, Pevzner PA. metaSPAdes: a new versatile metagenomic assembler. Genome Res. 2017;27:824–834. doi: 10.1101/gr.213959.116. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.213959.116)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5411777/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28298430/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genome%20Res&title=metaSPAdes:%20a%20new%20versatile%20metagenomic%20assembler&author=S%20Nurk&author=D%20Meleshko&author=A%20Korobeynikov&author=PA%20Pevzner&volume=27&publication_year=2017&pages=824-834&pmid=28298430&doi=10.1101/gr.213959.116&)\]
*   18.Kang DD, Froula J, Egan R, Wang Z. MetaBAT, an efficient tool for accurately reconstructing single genomes from complex microbial communities. PeerJ. 2015;3:e1165. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.1165)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4556158/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26336640/)\]
*   19.Parks DH, Imelfort M, Skennerton CT, Hugenholtz P, Tyson GW. CheckM: assessing the quality of microbial genomes recovered from isolates, single cells, and metagenomes. Genome Res. 2015;25:1043–55. doi: 10.1101/gr.186072.114. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.186072.114)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4484387/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25977477/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genome%20Res&title=CheckM:%20assessing%20the%20quality%20of%20microbial%20genomes%20recovered%20from%20isolates,%20single%20cells,%20and%20metagenomes&author=DH%20Parks&author=M%20Imelfort&author=CT%20Skennerton&author=P%20Hugenholtz&author=GW%20Tyson&volume=25&publication_year=2015&pages=1043-55&pmid=25977477&doi=10.1101/gr.186072.114&)\]
*   20.Aziz RK, Bartels D, Best AA, DeJongh M, Disz T, Edwards RA, Formsma K, Gerdes S, Glass EM, Kubal M, Meyer F, Olsen GJ, Olson R, Osterman AL, Overbeek RA, McNeil LK, Paarmann D, Paczian T, Parrello B, Pusch GD, Reich C, Stevens R, Vassieva O, Vonstein V, Wilke A, Zagnitko O. The RAST server: rapid annotations using subsystems technology. BMC Genomics. 2008;9:75. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-9-75. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2164-9-75)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2265698/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18261238/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=BMC%20Genomics&title=The%20RAST%20server:%20rapid%20annotations%20using%20subsystems%20technology&author=RK%20Aziz&author=D%20Bartels&author=AA%20Best&author=M%20DeJongh&author=T%20Disz&volume=9&publication_year=2008&pages=75&pmid=18261238&doi=10.1186/1471-2164-9-75&)\]
*   21.Uritskiy GV, DiRuggiero J, Taylor J. MetaWRAP-a flexible pipeline for genome-resolved metagenomic data analysis. Microbiome. 2018;6:158. doi: 10.1186/s40168-018-0541-1. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-018-0541-1)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6138922/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30219103/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Microbiome&title=MetaWRAP-a%20flexible%20pipeline%20for%20genome-resolved%20metagenomic%20data%20analysis&author=GV%20Uritskiy&author=J%20DiRuggiero&author=J%20Taylor&volume=6&publication_year=2018&pages=158&pmid=30219103&doi=10.1186/s40168-018-0541-1&)\]
*   22.Ondov BD, Treangen TJ, Melsted P, Mallonee AB, Bergman NH, Koren S, Phillippy AM. Mash: fast genome and metagenome distance estimation using MinHash. Genome Biology. 2016;17:132. doi: 10.1186/s13059-016-0997-x. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-016-0997-x)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4915045/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27323842/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genome%20Biology&title=Mash:%20fast%20genome%20and%20metagenome%20distance%20estimation%20using%20MinHash&author=BD%20Ondov&author=TJ%20Treangen&author=P%20Melsted&author=AB%20Mallonee&author=NH%20Bergman&volume=17&publication_year=2016&pages=132&pmid=27323842&doi=10.1186/s13059-016-0997-x&)\]
*   23.Wu M, Scott AJ. Phylogenomic analysis of bacterial and archaeal sequences with AMPHORA2. Bioinformatics. 2012;28:1033–4. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts079. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bts079)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22332237/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bioinformatics&title=Phylogenomic%20analysis%20of%20bacterial%20and%20archaeal%20sequences%20with%20AMPHORA2&author=M%20Wu&author=AJ%20Scott&volume=28&publication_year=2012&pages=1033-4&pmid=22332237&doi=10.1093/bioinformatics/bts079&)\]
*   24.Edgar RC. MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and high throughput. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004;32:1792–7. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkh340. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkh340)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC390337/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15034147/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nucleic%20Acids%20Res&title=MUSCLE:%20multiple%20sequence%20alignment%20with%20high%20accuracy%20and%20high%20throughput&author=RC%20Edgar&volume=32&publication_year=2004&pages=1792-7&pmid=15034147&doi=10.1093/nar/gkh340&)\]
*   25.Nguyen LT, Schmidt HA, von Haeseler A, Minh BQ. IQ-TREE: a fast and effective stochastic algorithm for estimating maximum-likelihood phylogenies. Mol Biol Evol. 2015;32:268–74. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msu300. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msu300)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4271533/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25371430/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol%20Biol%20Evol&title=IQ-TREE:%20a%20fast%20and%20effective%20stochastic%20algorithm%20for%20estimating%20maximum-likelihood%20phylogenies&author=LT%20Nguyen&author=HA%20Schmidt&author=A%20von%20Haeseler&author=BQ%20Minh&volume=32&publication_year=2015&pages=268-74&pmid=25371430&doi=10.1093/molbev/msu300&)\]
*   26.Li D, Luo R, Liu CM, Leung CM, Ting HF, Sadakane K, Yamashita H, Lam TW. MEGAHIT v1.0: a fast and scalable metagenome assembler driven by advanced methodologies and community practices. Methods. 2016;102:3–11. doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2016.02.020. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymeth.2016.02.020)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27012178/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Methods&title=MEGAHIT%20v1.0:%20a%20fast%20and%20scalable%20metagenome%20assembler%20driven%20by%20advanced%20methodologies%20and%20community%20practices&author=D%20Li&author=R%20Luo&author=CM%20Liu&author=CM%20Leung&author=HF%20Ting&volume=102&publication_year=2016&pages=3-11&pmid=27012178&doi=10.1016/j.ymeth.2016.02.020&)\]
*   27.Eddy SR. Hidden Markov models. Current Opinion in Structural Biology. 1996;6:361–365. doi: 10.1016/S0959-440X(96)80056-X. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0959-440X\(96\)80056-X)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8804822/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Current%20Opinion%20in%20Structural%20Biology&title=Hidden%20Markov%20models&author=SR%20Eddy&volume=6&publication_year=1996&pages=361-365&pmid=8804822&doi=10.1016/S0959-440X\(96\)80056-X&)\]
*   28.Chaumeil PA, Mussig AJ, Hugenholtz P, Parks DH. GTDB-Tk: a toolkit to classify genomes with the Genome Taxonomy Database. Bioinformatics. 2019 doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btz848. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btz848)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7703759/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31730192/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bioinformatics&title=GTDB-Tk:%20a%20toolkit%20to%20classify%20genomes%20with%20the%20Genome%20Taxonomy%20Database&author=PA%20Chaumeil&author=AJ%20Mussig&author=P%20Hugenholtz&author=DH%20Parks&publication_year=2019&pmid=31730192&doi=10.1093/bioinformatics/btz848&)\]
*   29.Manni M, Berkeley MR, Seppey M, Zdobnov EM. BUSCO: assessing genomic data quality and beyond. Current Protocols. 2021;1:e323. doi: 10.1002/cpz1.323. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/cpz1.323)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34936221/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Current%20Protocols&title=BUSCO:%20assessing%20genomic%20data%20quality%20and%20beyond&author=M%20Manni&author=MR%20Berkeley&author=M%20Seppey&author=EM%20Zdobnov&volume=1&publication_year=2021&pages=e323&pmid=34936221&doi=10.1002/cpz1.323&)\]
*   30.Katoh K, Standley DM. MAFFT multiple sequence alignment software version 7: improvements in performance and usability. Mol Biol Evol. 2013;30(4):772–80. doi: 10.1093/molbev/mst010. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/mst010)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3603318/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23329690/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol%20Biol%20Evol&title=MAFFT%20multiple%20sequence%20alignment%20software%20version%207:%20improvements%20in%20performance%20and%20usability&author=K%20Katoh&author=DM%20Standley&volume=30&issue=4&publication_year=2013&pages=772-80&pmid=23329690&doi=10.1093/molbev/mst010&)\]
*   31.Zhang C, Rabiee M, Sayyari E, Mirarab S. ASTRAL-III: polynomial time species tree reconstruction from partially resolved gene trees. BMC Bioinformatics. 2018;19:153. doi: 10.1186/s12859-018-2129-y. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-018-2129-y)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5998893/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29745866/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=BMC%20Bioinformatics&title=ASTRAL-III:%20polynomial%20time%20species%20tree%20reconstruction%20from%20partially%20resolved%20gene%20trees&author=C%20Zhang&author=M%20Rabiee&author=E%20Sayyari&author=S%20Mirarab&volume=19&publication_year=2018&pages=153&pmid=29745866&doi=10.1186/s12859-018-2129-y&)\]
*   32.Gostincar C. Towards genomic criteria for delineating fungal species. J Fungi (Basel) 2020;6(4):246. doi: 10.3390/jof6040246. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/jof6040246)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7711752/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33114441/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Fungi%20\(Basel\)&title=Towards%20genomic%20criteria%20for%20delineating%20fungal%20species&author=C%20Gostincar&volume=6&issue=4&publication_year=2020&pages=246&pmid=33114441&doi=10.3390/jof6040246&)\]
*   33.Contreras-Moreira B, Vinuesa P. GET\_HOMOLOGUES, a versatile software package for scalable and robust microbial pangenome analysis. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2013;79:7696–701. doi: 10.1128/AEM.02411-13. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.02411-13)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3837814/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24096415/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Appl%20Environ%20Microbiol&title=GET_HOMOLOGUES,%20a%20versatile%20software%20package%20for%20scalable%20and%20robust%20microbial%20pangenome%20analysis&author=B%20Contreras-Moreira&author=P%20Vinuesa&volume=79&publication_year=2013&pages=7696-701&pmid=24096415&doi=10.1128/AEM.02411-13&)\]
*   34.Kück P, Meusemann K. FASconCAT: convenient handling of data matrices. Mol Phylogenet Evol. 2010;56:1115–8. doi: 10.1016/j.ympev.2010.04.024. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ympev.2010.04.024)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20416383/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol%20Phylogenet%20Evol&title=FASconCAT:%20convenient%20handling%20of%20data%20matrices&author=P%20K%C3%BCck&author=K%20Meusemann&volume=56&publication_year=2010&pages=1115-8&pmid=20416383&doi=10.1016/j.ympev.2010.04.024&)\]
*   35.Törönen P, Holm L. PANNZER—a practical tool for protein function prediction. Protein Science. 2022;31:118–128. doi: 10.1002/pro.4193. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/pro.4193)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8740830/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34562305/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Protein%20Science&title=PANNZER%E2%80%94a%20practical%20tool%20for%20protein%20function%20prediction&author=P%20T%C3%B6r%C3%B6nen&author=L%20Holm&volume=31&publication_year=2022&pages=118-128&pmid=34562305&doi=10.1002/pro.4193&)\]
*   36.Alikhan N-F, Petty NK, Ben Zakour NL, Beatson SA. BLAST Ring Image Generator (BRIG): simple prokaryote genome comparisons. BMC Genomics. 2011;12:402. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-402. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2164-12-402)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3163573/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21824423/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=BMC%20Genomics&title=BLAST%20Ring%20Image%20Generator%20\(BRIG\):%20simple%20prokaryote%20genome%20comparisons&author=N-F%20Alikhan&author=NK%20Petty&author=NL%20Ben%20Zakour&author=SA%20Beatson&volume=12&publication_year=2011&pages=402&pmid=21824423&doi=10.1186/1471-2164-12-402&)\]
*   37.Singh NK, Bezdan D, Checinska Sielaff A, Wheeler K, Mason CE, Venkateswaran K. Multi-drug resistant Enterobacter bugandensis species isolated from the International Space Station and comparative genomic analyses with human pathogenic strains. BMC Microbiol. 2018;18:175. doi: 10.1186/s12866-018-1325-2. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12866-018-1325-2)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6251167/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30466389/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=BMC%20Microbiol&title=Multi-drug%20resistant%20Enterobacter%20bugandensis%20species%20isolated%20from%20the%20International%20Space%20Station%20and%20comparative%20genomic%20analyses%20with%20human%20pathogenic%20strains&author=NK%20Singh&author=D%20Bezdan&author=A%20Checinska%20Sielaff&author=K%20Wheeler&author=CE%20Mason&volume=18&publication_year=2018&pages=175&pmid=30466389&doi=10.1186/s12866-018-1325-2&)\]
*   38.Kumar S, Stecher G, Tamura K. MEGA7: Molecular Evolutionary Genetics Analysis Version 7.0 for bigger datasets. Mol Biol Evol. 2016;33:1870–4. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msw054. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msw054)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8210823/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27004904/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol%20Biol%20Evol&title=MEGA7:%20Molecular%20Evolutionary%20Genetics%20Analysis%20Version%207.0%20for%20bigger%20datasets&author=S%20Kumar&author=G%20Stecher&author=K%20Tamura&volume=33&publication_year=2016&pages=1870-4&pmid=27004904&doi=10.1093/molbev/msw054&)\]
*   39.Yamamoto S, Harayama S. PCR amplification and direct sequencing of gyrB genes with universal primers and their application to the detection and taxonomic analysis of Pseudomonas putida strains. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1995;61:1104–9. doi: 10.1128/aem.61.3.1104-1109.1995. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1128/aem.61.3.1104-1109.1995)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC167365/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7793912/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Appl%20Environ%20Microbiol&title=PCR%20amplification%20and%20direct%20sequencing%20of%20gyrB%20genes%20with%20universal%20primers%20and%20their%20application%20to%20the%20detection%20and%20taxonomic%20analysis%20of%20Pseudomonas%20putida%20strains&author=S%20Yamamoto&author=S%20Harayama&volume=61&publication_year=1995&pages=1104-9&pmid=7793912&doi=10.1128/aem.61.3.1104-1109.1995&)\]
*   40.Lombardino J, Bijlani S, Singh NK, Wood JM, Barker R, Gilroy S, Wang CCC, Venkateswaran K. Genomic characterization of potential plant growth-promoting features of Sphingomonas strains isolated from the International Space Station. Microbiol Spectr. 2022;10:e0199421. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.01994-21. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1128/spectrum.01994-21)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8754149/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35019675/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Microbiol%20Spectr&title=Genomic%20characterization%20of%20potential%20plant%20growth-promoting%20features%20of%20Sphingomonas%20strains%20isolated%20from%20the%20International%20Space%20Station&author=J%20Lombardino&author=S%20Bijlani&author=NK%20Singh&author=JM%20Wood&author=R%20Barker&volume=10&publication_year=2022&pages=e0199421&pmid=35019675&doi=10.1128/spectrum.01994-21&)\]
*   41.Bowers RM, Kyrpides NC, Stepanauskas R, Harmon-Smith M, Doud D, Reddy TBK, Schulz F, Jarett J, Rivers AR, Eloe-Fadrosh EA, Tringe SG, Ivanova NN, Copeland A, Clum A, Becraft ED, Malmstrom RR, Birren B, Podar M, Bork P, Weinstock GM, Garrity GM, Dodsworth JA, Yooseph S, Sutton G, Glockner FO, Gilbert JA, Nelson WC, Hallam SJ, Jungbluth SP, Ettema TJG, Tighe S, Konstantinidis KT, Liu WT, Baker BJ, Rattei T, Eisen JA, Hedlund B, McMahon KD, Fierer N, Knight R, Finn R, Cochrane G, Karsch-Mizrachi I, Tyson GW, Rinke C, Lapidus A, Meyer F, Yilmaz P, Parks DH, Eren AM, et al. Minimum information about a single amplified genome (MISAG) and a metagenome-assembled genome (MIMAG) of bacteria and archaea. Nat Biotechnol. 2017;35:725–731. doi: 10.1038/nbt.3893. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.3893)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6436528/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28787424/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Biotechnol&title=Minimum%20information%20about%20a%20single%20amplified%20genome%20\(MISAG\)%20and%20a%20metagenome-assembled%20genome%20\(MIMAG\)%20of%20bacteria%20and%20archaea&author=RM%20Bowers&author=NC%20Kyrpides&author=R%20Stepanauskas&author=M%20Harmon-Smith&author=D%20Doud&volume=35&publication_year=2017&pages=725-731&pmid=28787424&doi=10.1038/nbt.3893&)\]
*   42.Bijlani S, Parker C, Singh NK, Sierra MA, Foox J, Wang CCC, Mason CE, Venkateswaran K. Genomic characterization of the titan-like cell producing Naganishia tulchinskyi, the first novel eukaryote isolated from the International Space Station. Journal of Fungi. 2022;8:165. doi: 10.3390/jof8020165. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/jof8020165)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8875396/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35205919/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Journal%20of%20Fungi&title=Genomic%20characterization%20of%20the%20titan-like%20cell%20producing%20Naganishia%20tulchinskyi,%20the%20first%20novel%20eukaryote%20isolated%20from%20the%20International%20Space%20Station&author=S%20Bijlani&author=C%20Parker&author=NK%20Singh&author=MA%20Sierra&author=J%20Foox&volume=8&publication_year=2022&pages=165&pmid=35205919&doi=10.3390/jof8020165&)\]
*   43.Bradbury P, Wu H, Choi JU, Rowan AE, Zhang H, Poole K, Lauko J, Chou J. Modeling the impact of microgravity at the cellular level: implications for human disease. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2020;8:96. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2020.00096. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcell.2020.00096)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7047162/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32154251/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Front%20Cell%20Dev%20Biol&title=Modeling%20the%20impact%20of%20microgravity%20at%20the%20cellular%20level:%20implications%20for%20human%20disease&author=P%20Bradbury&author=H%20Wu&author=JU%20Choi&author=AE%20Rowan&author=H%20Zhang&volume=8&publication_year=2020&pages=96&pmid=32154251&doi=10.3389/fcell.2020.00096&)\]
*   44.Wilson JW, Ott CM, Honer zu Bentrup K, Ramamurthy R, Quick L, Porwollik S, Cheng P, McClelland M, Tsaprailis G, Radabaugh T, Hunt A, Fernandez D, Richter E, Shah M, Kilcoyne M, Joshi L, Nelman-Gonzalez M, Hing S, Parra M, Dumars P, Norwood K, Bober R, Devich J, Ruggles A, Goulart C, Rupert M, Stodieck L, Stafford P, Catella L, Schurr MJ, Buchanan K, Morici L, McCracken J, Allen P, Baker-Coleman C, Hammond T, Vogel J, Nelson R, Pierson DL, Stefanyshyn-Piper HM, Nickerson CA. Space flight alters bacterial gene expression and virulence and reveals a role for global regulator Hfq. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007;104:16299–304. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0707155104. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0707155104)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2042201/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17901201/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc%20Natl%20Acad%20Sci%20U%20S%20A&title=Space%20flight%20alters%20bacterial%20gene%20expression%20and%20virulence%20and%20reveals%20a%20role%20for%20global%20regulator%20Hfq&author=JW%20Wilson&author=CM%20Ott&author=K%20Honer%20zu%20Bentrup&author=R%20Ramamurthy&author=L%20Quick&volume=104&publication_year=2007&pages=16299-304&pmid=17901201&doi=10.1073/pnas.0707155104&)\]
*   45.Mehta SK, Laudenslager ML, Stowe RP, Crucian BE, Sams CF, Pierson DL. Multiple latent viruses reactivate in astronauts during space shuttle missions. Brain Behav Immun. 2014;41:210–7. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2014.05.014. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbi.2014.05.014)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24886968/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Brain%20Behav%20Immun&title=Multiple%20latent%20viruses%20reactivate%20in%20astronauts%20during%20space%20shuttle%20missions&author=SK%20Mehta&author=ML%20Laudenslager&author=RP%20Stowe&author=BE%20Crucian&author=CF%20Sams&volume=41&publication_year=2014&pages=210-7&pmid=24886968&doi=10.1016/j.bbi.2014.05.014&)\]
*   46.Urbaniak C, van Dam P, Zaborin A, Zaborina O, Gilbert JA, Torok T , Wang CCC, Venkateswaran K. Genomic characterization and virulence potential of two Fusarium oxysporum isolates cultured from the International Space Station. mSystems. 2019;4(2):e00345–18. doi: 10.1128/mSystems.00345-18. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1128/mSystems.00345-18)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6426649/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30944876/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=mSystems&title=Genomic%20characterization%20and%20virulence%20potential%20of%20two%20Fusarium%20oxysporum%20isolates%20cultured%20from%20the%20International%20Space%20Station&author=C%20Urbaniak&author=P%20van%20Dam&author=A%20Zaborin&author=O%20Zaborina&author=JA%20Gilbert&volume=4&issue=2&publication_year=2019&pages=e00345-18&pmid=30944876&doi=10.1128/mSystems.00345-18&)\]
*   47.Knox BP, Blachowicz A, Palmer JM, Romsdahl J, Huttenlocher A, Wang CC, Keller NP, Venkateswaran K. Characterization of Aspergillus fumigatus isolates from air and surfaces of the International Space Station. mSphere. 2016;1(5):e00227–16. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00227-16. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1128/mSphere.00227-16)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5082629/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27830189/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=mSphere&title=Characterization%20of%20Aspergillus%20fumigatus%20isolates%20from%20air%20and%20surfaces%20of%20the%20International%20Space%20Station&author=BP%20Knox&author=A%20Blachowicz&author=JM%20Palmer&author=J%20Romsdahl&author=A%20Huttenlocher&volume=1&issue=5&publication_year=2016&pages=e00227-16&pmid=27830189&doi=10.1128/mSphere.00227-16&)\]
*   48.Rekha PD, Hameed A, Manzoor MAP, Suryavanshi MV, Ghate SD, Arun AB, Rao SS, Athmika Bajire SK, Mujeeburahiman M, Young C-C. First report of pathogenic bacterium Kalamiella piersonii isolated from urine of a kidney stone patient: draft genome and evidence for role in struvite crystallization. Pathogens. 2020;9:711. doi: 10.3390/pathogens9090711. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/pathogens9090711)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7558591/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32872396/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pathogens&title=First%20report%20of%20pathogenic%20bacterium%20Kalamiella%20piersonii%20isolated%20from%20urine%20of%20a%20kidney%20stone%20patient:%20draft%20genome%20and%20evidence%20for%20role%20in%20struvite%20crystallization&author=PD%20Rekha&author=A%20Hameed&author=MAP%20Manzoor&author=MV%20Suryavanshi&author=SD%20Ghate&volume=9&publication_year=2020&pages=711&pmid=32872396&doi=10.3390/pathogens9090711&)\]
*   49.Wang C, Wu W, Wei L, Feng Y, Kang M, Xie Y, Zong Z. Enterobacter wuhouensis sp. nov. and Enterobacter quasihormaechei sp. nov. recovered from human sputum. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2020;70:874–881. doi: 10.1099/ijsem.0.003837. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1099/ijsem.0.003837)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31702537/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int%20J%20Syst%20Evol%20Microbiol&title=Enterobacter%20wuhouensis%20sp.%20nov.%20and%20Enterobacter%20quasihormaechei%20sp.%20nov.%20recovered%20from%20human%20sputum&author=C%20Wang&author=W%20Wu&author=L%20Wei&author=Y%20Feng&author=M%20Kang&volume=70&publication_year=2020&pages=874-881&pmid=31702537&doi=10.1099/ijsem.0.003837&)\]
*   50.Mcclure J-A, Shideler SM, Zhang K, Stewart FJ. Complete Genome Sequence of GD1108, a Moderate-Virulence Strain of Human-Associated ST398 Methicillin-Susceptible Staphylococcus aureus. Microbiol Resour Announc. 2019;8:e00687–00619. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1128/MRA.00687-19)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6624772/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31296689/)\]
*   51.He Z, Liang J, Tang Z, Ma R, Peng H, Huang Z. Role of the _luxS_ gene in initial biofilm formation by _Streptococcus mutans_. Microb Physiol. 2015;25:60–8. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1159/000371816)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25766758/)\]

## Associated Data

_This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article._

### Supplementary Materials

### Data Availability Statement

The data described in this manuscript can be freely and openly accessed on NCBI Short Read Archive under the bio-project number PRJNA438545.