---
title: "Inter-agency perspective: Translating advances in biomarker discovery and medical countermeasures development between terrestrial and space radiation environments"
authors: ["Andrea L DiCarlo", "Lisa S Carnell", "Carmen I Rios", "Pataje G Prasanna"]
journal: "Life sciences in space research"
date: "2022 Jun 14"
doi: "10.1016/j.lssr.2022.06.004"
source_url: "https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9832585/"
---

# Inter-agency perspective: Translating advances in biomarker discovery and medical countermeasures development between terrestrial and space radiation environments

*Life sciences in space research*, 2022 Jun 14, [doi:10.1016/j.lssr.2022.06.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lssr.2022.06.004)

### Andrea L DiCarlo
### Lisa S Carnell
### Carmen I Rios
### Pataje G Prasanna

. Author manuscript; available in PMC: 2023 Jan 11.

_Published in final edited form as:_ Life Sci Space Res (Amst). 2022 Jun 14;35:9–19. doi: [10.1016/j.lssr.2022.06.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lssr.2022.06.004)

## Abstract

Over the past 20+ years, the U.S. Government has made significant strides in establishing research funding and initiating a portfolio consisting of subject matter experts on radiation-induced biological effects in normal tissues. Research supported by the National Cancer Institute (NCI) provided much of the early findings on identifying cellular pathways involved in radiation injuries, due to the need to push the boundaries to kill tumor cells while minimizing damage to intervening normal tissues. By protecting normal tissue surrounding the tumors, physicians can deliver a higher radiation dose to tumors and reduce adverse effects related to the treatment. Initially relying on this critical NCI research, the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), first tasked with developing radiation medical countermeasures in 2004, has provided bridge funding to move basic research toward advanced development and translation. The goal of the NIAID program is to fund approaches that can one day be employed to protect civilian populations during a radiological or nuclear incident. In addition, with the reality of long-term space flights and the possibility of radiation exposures to both acute, high-intensity, and chronic lower-dose levels, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) has identified requirements to discover and develop radioprotectors and mitigators to protect their astronauts during space missions. In sustained partnership with sister agencies, these three organizations must continue to leverage funding and findings in their overlapping research areas to accelerate biomarker identification and product development to help safeguard these different and yet undeniably similar human populations – cancer patients, public citizens, and astronauts.

**Keywords:** Space, Radiation, Medical countermeasures, Chronic, Cancer, Biomarkers

## 1\. Introduction

Given the importance of ensuring the protection of humans from radiation injury, strong collaborations have been forged between U.S. Government funding agencies with mandates to develop products to protect, mitigate, and/or treat radiation-induced normal tissue injuries. There has been a strong track record of interactions between the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and the National Institutes of Health (NIH), including the National Cancer Institute (NCI) and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) - organizations that have been tasked with understanding mechanisms of radiation-induced biological damage and exploring pathways for the development of drugs to address radiation injuries. Past synergies have included co-sponsoring scientific meetings, co-funding research, and involvement through inter-agency grant/contract review teams and working groups. Several publications have resulted from these prior cooperative efforts ([Carnell et al., 2017](#R16); [Yoo et al., 2014](#R118)). In 2007, a memorandum of understanding was established between NIH and NASA[1](#FN3) to formalize interactions with each organization establishing areas of cooperation, including the “development of biomedical research approaches and clinical technologies for use on Earth and in space.” NASA and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) also signed an interagency agreement in 2018 to share innovative ideas for addressing science and technology challenges and to coordinate and collaborate on research that could improve human health on Earth and in space.[2](#FN4) Finally, since 2017 the NIAID/NASA Medical Countermeasures Working Group, with representation from NCI and other parts of HHS, has endeavored to rapidly and continually share information concerning research advances, to accelerate activities for all agencies.

Although the core mission of these organizations is similar, each directs research efforts toward the specific needs of its target human population. For example, NCI’s interest in radiation stems from the use of localized, high-dose, gamma, x-ray, or proton radiotherapy in cancer treatments. Since incidental damage to surrounding normal tissues can limit the amount of radiation therapy delivered to a tumor, developing approaches using short-term administration of radioprotectants that are not tumor-protective is essential ([Prasanna et al., 2012](#R80)). Additionally, since the time of radiation exposure is known during radiotherapy, it is possible to administer radioprotectors before irradiation.

Similarly, NASA’s concern is the protection of astronauts who will be exposed to low dose but extended periods of irradiation with high linear energy transfer (LET) radiation. The primary risks of concern include carcinogenesis, central nervous system (CNS) effects resulting in potential in-mission cognitive or behavioral impairment and/or late neurological disorders, degenerative tissue effects including circulatory and heart disease, as well as possible immune system decrements impacting multiple aspects of crew health. These outcomes also represent concerns for late effects of irradiation similar following a course of radiotherapy or after unanticipated low-dose exposures during a radiation incident. Characterization and mitigation of these risks require a significant reduction in the large biological uncertainties of chronic (low-dose rate) high charge and energy (HZE) exposures and validation of medical countermeasures (MCMs) in a relevant space environment ([Simonsen et al., 2020](#R99)). Although exposure levels are much lower than those used in radiotherapy, the duration of exposure is far longer. The intent of using mitigators is to prevent and/or reduce late effects thought to be associated with chronic, low doses of radiation. Thus, it is necessary to have products that are safe when dosed continuously because the time during a spaceflight when a harmful exposure may occur can be difficult to predict.

Finally, the mission of the Radiation and Nuclear Countermeasures Program (RNCP) within the NIAID is to address radiation injuries following prompt, high-dose exposure of civilian populations during a radiological or nuclear incident. Because it is impossible to predict when these exposures will occur, use of prophylactic (pre-exposure products is not feasible; therefore, drugs that can mitigate (given post-irradiation but before symptoms manifest) or treat (given after clinically detectable injury) are of greatest interest. Like the NCI, high doses of radiation are of concern; however, the exposures are anticipated to be nearly total-body. NIAID’s primary focus is on developing effective approaches to improve survival and reduce the risk of major morbidities.

Clearly, given limited budgets available for radiation research, to maximize opportunities for synergy, it is incumbent on NASA, NCI, and NIAID to leverage investments across mission spaces when possible. In addition, with a limited number of radiation researchers, principal investigators are often involved in, and receive funding from, all three agencies to carry out research projects that have some overlap. To that end, the authors have attempted to identify radioprotectors, radiomitigators, and radiotherapies in their respective portfolios, to address NASA’s concerns in the care of astronauts exposed to radiation in long-duration space travel. It should be noted that the focus of the present work is on drugs with potential use to mitigate damage resulting from chronic, long-term exposures. Therefore, a discussion of approaches to minimize acute radiation syndrome (ARS) risks to astronauts from solar particle radiation is not considered in depth. A separate review addressing this area has been released by the NASA Human Research Program ([National Aeronautics and Space Administration 2016](#R76)). Furthermore, gaps in each mission space are identified herein, and the need for shared approaches across these organizations to address them.

## 2\. Background

The importance of MCM development and biomarker identification for both acute and long-term effects of radiation align with the missions of NIAID, NASA, and NCI ([Fig. 1](#F1)). NASA is concerned with acute exposures from solar particle events (SPEs), and delayed effects from these exposures could impact the quality of life for the crew upon returning to Earth. NASA is also interested in the bodily effects of prolonged exposure to space radiation during long missions. At the same time, NCI is concerned with roles of radiation in cancer prevention, detection, diagnosis, treatment, and survivorship. Charged with treating civilian casualties after a radiological or nuclear incident, NIAID’s efforts are focused primarily on the acute and delayed effects of high dose-irradiations to large portions of the body.

### 2.1. NASA

NASA has identified five hazards to astronauts associated with long-duration, deep space exploration missions (radiation, isolation and confinement, distance from Earth, Gravity (or lack thereof), and hostile/closed environments). Three key radiation-associated risks have also been outlined: 1) carcinogenesis; 2) cardiovascular disease and other degenerative tissue effects; and 3) acute (in-flight) and late central nervous system effects (e.g., changes in cognition, motor function, behavior, or neurological disorders). These risks also align well with those of NIAID and NCI. The primary challenges for NASA are to understand the severity of these risks in a space-relevant environment, evaluate MCMs that may provide radioprotection or mitigation, and identify biomarkers to indicate if/when an MCM may need to be administered during a mission. It is also imperative to determine any proposed MCM’s dosage, delivery, storage, and shelf-life since many space missions will have limited payload and refrigeration capacity. Therefore, selecting critical-need pharmaceuticals and identifying biomarkers to determine the timing of intervention and avoid treatment-related toxicities will be paramount. Continued interactions with NIH programs exploring therapeutics for normal tissue injuries will provide new approaches to be considered for astronaut health in a radiation environment.

### 2.2. NIAID

The mission of NIAID’s RNCP is to support early to mid-stage research to develop MCMs and biodosimetry tools for U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval, with an emphasis on products to treat or mitigate radiation injuries when administered post-irradiation, radionuclide decorporation agents, and biodosimetry tools and biomarker discovery for triage and to predict biological impacts of exposure. Several of these topics represent areas of overlap with NCI and NASA (e.g., minimization of normal tissue injuries, and biomarker identification). Another area of focus for NIAID, and a shared interest of NASA and NCI are the delayed effects of acute radiation exposure, including lung complications. NIAID has funded intramural studies at NCI on long-term health outcomes resulting from chronic, lower dose irradiation, since people could spend significant time in a lower dose, fallout environment after a nuclear incident ([Simon et al., 2022](#R97); [Beck et al., 2022](#R9); [Land et al., 2015](#R60); [Drozdovitch et al., 2015](#R32)). These findings can be used to anticipate potential outcomes following chronic exposures of NASA space flight personnel, and possible late effects in radiotherapy patients. In addition, the strong partnership between NIAID and NASA staff has helped both agencies to keep abreast of significant developments in each program, including exciting research findings and shared policy decisions.

### 2.3. NCI

More than 50% of cancer patients are treated with radiotherapy, often combined with chemotherapy, immunotherapy, and/or surgery. Therefore, NCI’s Radiation Research Program (RRP) was established as a nexus for funding extramural research activities related to radiation therapy. Although dose prescriptions to a tumor or tissue are generally based on a population average, radiation therapy is now pursuing precision medicine and predictive oncology, where doses are individualized or stratified to a cohort ([Coleman et al., 2018](#R23)). Since many patients suffer from adverse treatment effects, which could be acute, intermediate, or late ([Prasanna et al., 2012](#R80)), the RRP has supported predictive biomarker development ([Prasanna et al., 2020](#R83); [Prasanna et al., 2014](#R81)), along with radioprotectors and mitigators to reduce treatment-related toxicities and improve patient outcomes ([Prasanna et al., 2015](#R82); [Coleman et al., 2021](#R24)). Cancer survivorship will expand with improvements in treatment, with one estimate suggesting >26 million cancer survivors by 2040 ([Bluethmann et al., 2016](#R12)). Establishment of tracking in these populations will provide an opportunity to study late radiation impacts, including second cancers ([Singh et al., 2017](#R102)) and cardiovascular disease ([Spetz et al., 2018](#R104)). Exploring outcomes in these patient populations can inform long-term impacts of continuous, lower doses of radiation exposure in individuals involved in NASA long space flights and provide insight into possible late effects in populations unexpectedly exposed to radiation during a public health emergency.

## 3\. Cross-cutting models and tools

### 3.1. Preclinical models

A shared challenge in radiation research among agencies is replacing, reducing, and responsibly conducting animal research while identifying, and developing unproven therapies for human use. To address this requirement, many models have been established to look at terrestrial and space-based radiation, ranging from in vitro cell cultures, tissue chips, and invertebrates, to small (rodents) and large (nonhuman primates, dogs, minipigs, etc.) laboratory animals to humans. In addition, infrastructure for studying the effects of high-LET radiation exposures is limited and expensive, and thus a challenge when developing large animal models, so leveraging studies on these species in other radiation scenarios (such as radiotherapy in the clinic or unanticipated exposure during a radiological or nuclear incident) is essential. In many instances, researchers receive concurrent support from NASA, NCI, and NIAID, and can use the animal models they have developed to contribute meaningful data for all three agencies.

The 2021 NASA trans-agency research announcement, “Extended Longevity of 3D Tissues and Microphysiological Systems (MPS) for Modeling Acute and Chronic Exposures to Stressors,[3](#FN5) represents an effort sponsored by NASA’s Space Biology Program, with the participation of NASA’s Human Research Program. Complex human in vitro models such as tissue chips or microphysiological systems (MPS) are three-dimensional (3D) systems constructed of cells grown on bioengineered platforms that mimic in vivo tissue architecture and physiological conditions. These platforms can incorporate complex in vivo factors, including extracellular scaffolding, 3D structures, cellular interactions, perfusion, biomechanical stresses, electrical stimulation, and hormone/inflammatory responses. The purpose of the announcement was to solicit research supporting common cross-organizational goals by focusing on adapting existing MPS to extend their longevity to at least six months, while thoroughly testing and validating the models for acute and chronic stressors. Contract awards reflect collaboration across multiple agencies including NCI and NIAID. Each participating organization has unique and specific applications for tissue-engineered models, yet they all identified common interests resulting in this multi-organizational effort, and the resulting research findings are expected to benefit all the mission spaces.

### 3.2. Biomarkers of injury

Biomarkers in biomedical research are integral to understanding disease pathogenesis and healing ([Robb et al., 2016](#R87)). Once biomarkers are identified, evaluated, and qualified, they can help bridge preclinical data across species and predict human clinical outcomes. As defined by the NIH-FDA Biomarker Working Group in the joint document, BEST (**B**iomarkers, **E**ndpoint**S**, and other **T**ools) Resource,[4](#FN6) biomarkers are indicators of normal biological and pathogenic processes or responses to an exposure or intervention, including therapeutics ([Robb et al., 2016](#R87)). Biomarkers can be molecular, histologic, radiographic, or physiologic characteristics and do not necessarily assess how a patient feels, functions, or survives ([Califf, 2018](#R14)). Molecular patterns, gene expression profiles, and miRNA signatures have been explored for possible use in radiation dose reconstruction, disease prognosis, prediction of radiation sensitivity, and use in medical triage. In addition, study of biomarkers to determine if and when MCMs should be administered during a radiation emergency also inform on exposures during a spaceflight mission, and may reduce the need to take prophylactic MCMs and allow appropriate medical intervention. Biomarkers could also help determine individual sensitivity from radiation exposure and guide both determination of fitness for radiation exposure (e.g., during therapy or space flight), and precise delivery of MCMs for each victim, radiotherapy patient or space crew member. To this end, NASA, NCI and NIAID have worked together to explore different models for radiation-induced injuries, such as hematopoietic ([DiCarlo et al., 2019](#R30)), cutaneous ([DiCarlo et al., 2020](#R31)), lung ([Cassatt et al., 2022](#R17)), and late carcinogenic endpoints ([Yoo et al., 2014](#R118)).

### 3.3. Data mining/analytics

Discovery and identification of areas of interest for generating leads to develop therapies will need to be accomplished by employing data analytics across numerous data sets. NASA’s GeneLab repository hosts space biology and related laboratory datasets and is utilized by multiple agencies worldwide. This interactive, open-access database allows scientists to upload, download, store, search, share, transfer, and analyze “omics” data from spaceflight and corresponding analog experiments. Although a vital shared resource, NASA does not have the volume of human flight data necessary to achieve statistical significance for many inquiries. Working with national and international communities to combine data in a central database will help develop new approaches. Fortunately, there is potential for collaboration with NCI, and NIAID in this area. The NCI Cancer Research Data Commons[5](#FN7) provides access to genomic, proteomic, comparative oncology, imaging, etc., in addition to data from NCI programs such as The Cancer Genome Atlas.[6](#FN8) These projects address several NCI challenges, including understanding molecular bases of crucial protein interactions, developing predictive models for drug response, and automating analysis and extraction of information from patient records to determine optimal treatment strategies.[7](#FN9) NCI staff are discussing with NASA program representatives ways to explore these databases for relevant information on radiation exposures of interest to both agencies.

NIAID has developed the Immunology Database and Analysis Portal (ImmPort)[8](#FN10) resource, which provides experimental data, metadata, and analysis tools on basic and clinical immunology research that includes radiation information. ImmPort is open to the public for sharing research data and creates an integrated environment that broadens the use of scientific data and advances hypothesis-driven/generating research. There is currently an effort underway to connect ImmPort with NASA GeneLab and NCI repositories described above to provide researchers curated access to volumes of data that can be mined for future radiation studies.

## 4\. Knowledge gained from epidemiology studies addresses space risk assessment

Radiation epidemiological health risk assessments conducted by the U.S. Government have included studies of Japanese A-bomb survivors and humans exposed during nuclear emergencies, occupational exposure cohorts, astronauts, populations living in high background radiation areas, and nuclear medicine and radiotherapy patients ([Ali et al., 2020](#R2)). For example, cancer risks in the A-bomb lifespan study cohort continue to rise throughout life ([Ozasa et al., 2012](#R77)); however, clearly defining carcinogenic risks from low-dose irradiation has been challenging A literature review published by NCI researchers within the Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics considered studies with mean radiation doses less than 100 mGy and found an excess relative risk of greater than 1.0 for most solid cancers and leukemia ([Berrington de Gonzalez et al., 2020](#R11)). This is consistent with the recent million-person study of U.S. radiation workers and atomic veterans that suggests leukemia and lung cancer risks are lower from chronic than acute exposures, and that low-level radiation exposures are associated with circulatory diseases ([Little et al., 2012](#R63)). NIAID has supported epidemiology work carried out by NCI researchers on health effects in Marshall Islanders exposed to the fallout following the Castle Bravo nuclear test ([Simon et al., 2022](#R97)), individuals exposed during Nevada Atomic Testing ([Beck et al., 2022](#R9)), and the Semipalatinsk Nuclear Test Site ([Land et al., 2015](#R60)), and exposed populations living near Chernobyl ([Drozdovitch et al., 2015](#R32)). These studies have contributed to a better understanding of how persistent, low-dose exposures can be harmful. Because it is difficult to assess the long-term impact of space radiation on flight personnel, these studies assessing late effects resulting from exposure to other forms of radiation provide insight into what could be experienced by astronauts after returning from long duration space missions. The NASA Space Radiation Laboratory (NSRL) at Brookhaven National Laboratory has been expanded through development of a galactic cosmic rays (GCR) facility designed to provide a mixed spectrum of ion beams to simulate the space radiation environment ([Simonsen et al., 2020](#R99)). NSRL provides researchers the ability to conduct high-LET, mixed field radiation studies on the ground, to better understand space radiation effects on biology. understand space radiation effects and perform long-terms animal studies under controlled conditions. While NSRL can provide access to high-LET mixed field exposures, the dose-rate expected in space is significantly lower than the facility can provide, hence, the ideal exposure scenario will be conducted on future Artemis missions designed to take astronauts to the lunar surface, Gateway, and beyond.

## 5\. Repurposing licensed products

Inherent to NASA’s challenges in developing MCMs for use in space is the need to minimize the mass of carried products. For this reason, it is of great interest for potential radiation MCMs to have multiple space crew uses. The ideal drug, for example, will provide cross-protection through antioxidants that provide free radical scavenging, common pathways (e.g., inflammatory), or other biological pathways that intersects multiple risks. If an MCM were able to be used as a radioprotectant in addition to another health indication, that kind of repurposing would be desirable. Both NIH and NASA have prioritized repurposing of products for other clinical indications so that a large body of safety and efficacy in humans physician familiarity can be leveraged. In the case of NASA, a product’s approval status can inform on its safe extended use in the space environment and accelerate the timeline for transition to operations. A 2017 meeting held by NIAID on this topic outlined several already licensed drugs that could be considered as radiation treatment approaches ([DiCarlo et al., 2018](#R29)). In addition, a 2017 review of the potential for the use of common drugs to protect during spaceflight has reviewed in more detail several of the approaches discussed below ([McLaughlin et al., 2017](#R66)).

## 6\. Overlapping mechanisms of radiation injury drug classes with space mission utility

In leveraging investments by the NIH in approaches of potential interest to NASA, it is essential to note that such treatments may need to be administered over time frames of months to years to ensure that protection was consistent throughout, for example, an extended space flight mission to Mars. For that reason, products that are known to be safe with extended dosing provide the most appropriate selections for further study. Many approaches with these known long-term safety profiles fall into the general category of nutraceuticals. However, several products in constant and daily use by individuals worldwide also fall into this category (e.g., antibiotics, analgesics, anti-hypertensives). Although several products detailed below were initially tested in a high-dose, terrestrial irradiation setting, some have also shown promise for more chronic, lower-dose, and dose-rate irradiation exposures, and have demonstrated benefits in a space-irradiation context. These selected approaches that have received NASA and/or prior NIH funding are discussed below and outlined in [Table 1](#T1).

### Table 1.

Candidate ground-based MCM approaches with potential NASA chronic exposure interest. Research on many drugs shown in the table has been supported by multiple U.S. government organizations, enabling limited funding to be used to leverage research results across radiation mission spaces.


| Product name | Source | Mechanism of action | Status | Funding agency(ies) | Reference(s) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|
* * *

 |
| --- |
| JP4–039 | University of Pittsburgh | Anti-apoptotic | R&D | NIAID, NCI, NASA | ([Goff et al., 2011](#R40)) |
| sPIF[‡](#TFN3) | BioIncept | Anti-apoptotic | R&D | NIAID | ([Shainer et al., 2016](#R93)) |
| Genistein | Various | Anti-apoptotic | GRAS | NIAID | ([Prasanna et al., 2015](#R82); [Day et al., 2008](#R27); [Citrin et al., 2017](#R22); [Zakeri et al., 2019](#R119)) |
| CX-01 | Ceramedix Holding, LLC | Anti-apoptotic | R&D | NIAID | ([Rotolo et al., 2012](#R88)) |
| BIO300 | Humanetics | Anti-apoptotic
SOD-mimetic | R&D | NASA, NCI NIAID | ([Zakeri et al., 2019](#R119); [Singh and Seed, 2020](#R100)) |
| BMX-001 | BioMimetix, JV, LLC | Anti-apoptotic
SOD-mimetic | R&D | NCI | ([Zakeri et al., 2019](#R119)) |
| GC4419 | Galera Therapeutics | Anti-apoptotic
SOD-mimetic | R&D | NCI, NASA | ([Anderson et al., 2018](#R4)) |
| AEOL-10,150 | Aeolus Pharmaceuticals | Anti-apoptotic
SOD-mimetic | R&D | NIAID, NCI | ([Murigi et al., 2015](#R75); [MacVittie et al., 2017](#R65); [Sonis, 2001](#R103)) |
| Fluoroquinolones | Generic | Antibiotic | Licensed | NIAID | ([Kim et al., 2009](#R55)) |
| Minocycline | Generic | Antibiotic | Licensed | NASA, NCI | ([Mehrotra et al., 2013](#R68); [Zhang et al., 2014](#R120)) |
| Tetracyclines | Generic | Antibiotic | Licensed | NIAID | ([Epperly et al., 2010](#R34)) |
| Aspirin | Generic | Anti-inflammatory | Licensed | NASA | ([Qiao et al., 2018](#R85); [Mitrugno et al., 2017](#R72); [Camara Planek et al., 2020](#R15)) |
| CDDO-ME | Various | Anti-inflammatory | R&D | NASA NCI | ([Eskiocak et al., 2010](#R35); [El-Ashmawy et al., 2014](#R33)) |
| Celecoxib | Generic | Anti-inflammatory | Licensed | NIAID | ([Hunter et al., 2013](#R48)) |
| Bowman-Birk Inhibitor | University of Pennsylvania | Anti-inflammatory | GRAS (soybean-derived) | NASA, NCI | ([Shaghagi et al., 2021](#R92); [Kennedy, 2021](#R54)) |
| Curcumin | University of Rochester | Anti-oxidant | GRAS[†](#TFN2) | NCI, NIAID | ([Amini et al., 2018](#R3); [Jelveh et al., 2013](#R50)) |
| Flaxseed (dietary-derived) | Various | Anti-oxidant | GRAS | NCI, NASA, NIAID | ([Lee et al., 2009](#R62); [Christofidou-Solomidou et al., 2011](#R21)) |
| LGM2605 (synthetic flaxseed derivative) | LignaMed | Anti-oxidant | R&D | NASA, NIAID | ([Lee et al., 2009](#R62); [Christofidou-Solomidou et al., 2011](#R21)) |
| Vitamins (A, C, E) | Various | Anti-oxidant | Nutraceutical | NASA, NCI, NIAID | ([Yoo et al., 2014](#R118)) |
| Ketones | T Delta S | Anti-oxidant | GRAS | NIAID, NCI | ([Klement, 2018](#R56)) |
| Enterade | University of Florida | Increased GI absorption | Nutraceutical | NASA, NIAID | ([Yin et al., 2014](#R116); [Gupta et al., 2020](#R43)) |
| ABT263 | University of Arkansas for Medical Science | Senolytic | R&D | NCI, NIAID | ([Chang et al., 2016](#R18)) |

\*

Research and Development.

†

Generally Regarded as Safe (e.g., food additive).

‡

Preimplantation factor synthetic analog.

### 6.1. Anti-oxidants

Under physiological conditions, low reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels are produced due to normal cellular processes. ROS existing as free oxygen or nitrogen oxide radicals primarily function as signaling molecules that induce cell differentiation and apoptosis, among other activities. However, exposure to stressors such as radiation can trigger an imbalance in free radical generation and their removal, leading to DNA damage ([Jakubczyk et al., 2020](#R49)), with the potential to induce early and late effects ([Hoorelbeke et al., 2020](#R47)). It has been established that radiation exposure in all its forms leads to an immediate and chronic state of oxidative stress. The interaction of radiation with water molecules within the body leads to ROS generation, which, although short-lived, can wreak cellular havoc ([Simone et al., 2009](#R98)). Similarly, a chronic state of radiation-induced oxidative stress ([Riley, 1994](#R86)) can lead to altered homeostasis, which can continue for many hours to months beyond initial exposure ([Azzam et al., 2012](#R5)). This oxidant injury is non-specific, with all intracellular elements (e.g., proteins, lipids, carbohydrates) subject to the damage.

For this reason, antioxidant approaches have been investigated to modulate radiation-induced intracellular perturbations. Several popular candidates include nutraceuticals (e.g., vitamins ([Changizi et al., 2019](#R19); [Sihver and Mortazavi, 2021](#R96); [Singh et al., 2013](#R101)), melatonin ([Kumar et al., 2022](#R59)), flavonoids ([Landauer et al., 2019](#R61)), and other dietary approaches (e.g., curcumin ([Amini et al., 2018](#R3); [Jelveh et al., 2013](#R50)), and flaxseed ([Christofidou-Solomidou et al., 2011](#R21)). This predominantly “generally regarded as safe” (GRAS) class of products has volumes of safety data and known low toxicity. Such products may be amenable to NASA since they could be easily included in the essential diet of a space traveler.

#### 6.1.1. Nutraceuticals/dietary modifications

Several vitamin approaches mentioned above are covered in detail in another paper in this issue (Singh et al.). Dietary supplementation with Bowman-Birk protease inhibitors derived from soybeans ([Shaghagi et al., 2021](#R92); [Kennedy, 2021](#R54)), L-selenomethionine, or a combination of selected antioxidant agents ([Guan et al., 2004](#R42); [Kennedy et al., 2007](#R53)) has shown promise to prevent the decrease in antioxidants in the plasma of mice exposed to proton or HZE particle radiation. Adding nutritional foods, such as blueberries, to crew diets may provide added benefits to help reduce ROS and mitigate radiation-induced CNS effects, as reported in animal studies using space-relevant radiation exposures ([Poulose et al., 2017](#R79)). In one study, feeding dried plums to mice mitigated radiation-induced loss of bone and demonstrated potential as a radiomitigator for protons and HZE particle radiation ([Schreurs et al., 2016](#R91)). Flaxseed is bioactive lignin that is both an antioxidant/anti-inflammatory signaling agent ([Turowski et al., 2015](#R107)). It has been in clinical trials for non-small cell lung cancer to protect normal tissue ([NCT00955942](https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00955942)) and manage cardiovascular risk and hypotension ([Berman et al., 2013](#R10)). NASA recently funded a Phase II SBIR study to investigate the potential of LGM-2605, synthetic flaxseed, as a potential prophylactic radioprotector from the mixed field and GCR effects (described in greater detail below) ([Chatterjee et al., 2019](#R20)).

#### 6.1.2. LGM2605

LGM2605 (LignaMed, Philadelphia, PA) is a synthetic form of a natural component typically found in dietary flaxseed; thus, its excellent safety profile is well-established. Initially studied in cell-free ([Mishra et al., 2014](#R70)) and in vitro models of radiation injuries ([Chatterjee et al., 2019](#R20)), it became apparent that the radiation protection offered by the product (and its dietary-derived precursors) was significant. Later in vivo work focused on mitigation of radiation-induced lung injuries ([Lee et al., 2009](#R62); [Christofidou-Solomidou et al., 2011](#R21)), and an _ex vivo_ organ culture model of human lungs showed protection against proton irradiation ([Velalopoulou et al., 2017](#R110)). Of importance is the finding that the drug could reduce tissue injuries from exposure to radiation with high relevance to NASA, where it demonstrated the ability to blunt high-LET radiation-induced activation of the inflammasome in a lung vascular model ([Chatterjee et al., 2019](#R20)). Therefore, this product seems to be a reasonable option for NASA’s consideration.

#### 6.1.3. Enterade

The University of Florida, which first created the Gatorade sports drink, also recently developed another nutritional plant-based drink for cancer patients, Enterade. It is a commercially available amino acid-based oral rehydration fluid that has been shown to alleviate GI complications experienced by patients undergoing chemo- and/or radiation therapy ([De Filipp et al., 2021](#R28)). Preclinical studies have also shown that Enterade can reverse radiation-induced injury that leads to a breakdown in GI structure ([Gupta et al., 2020](#R43)), increase weight gain and provide a survival benefit in mice ([Yin et al., 2014](#R116)). It has also been studied with funding from the National Space Biomedical Research Institute in experiments that found that the drink given as a daily gavage improved electrolyte balance and GI absorption of nutrients in irradiated animals ([Yin et al., 2016](#R117)).

#### 6.1.4. Ketones

A method for reducing free radical damage occurs through the metabolism of ketone bodies. Elevated levels of ketone bodies can be pathological in disorders such as diabetes or maybe the result of a diet low in carbohydrates. Ketone ester has been evaluated as a dietary supplement to address oxygen toxicity ([Stavitzski et al., 2021](#R105)) and is considered by the FDA to fall into the GRAS category ([Veech et al., 2017](#R109)). A novel ketone ester product has been tested for efficacy in preclinical studies in mice for hematopoietic ARS. It is hypothesized that ketone esters can protect hematopoietic tissue and thus improve chances of survival in the animals by quenching the cascade of free radicals induced by ionizing radiation.[9](#FN11) Use of ketones in cancer therapies has also been reviewed ([Klement, 2018](#R56)), where its use has been linked to a lower incidence of normal tissue injuries during radiation therapy.

#### 6.1.5. Superoxide dismutase (SOD) mimetics

SOD mimetics, such as Mn porphyrins, can have diverse reaction potentials in vivo and modulate cellular redox regulatory signaling networks ([Batinic-Haberle and ME, 2019](#R7)). They have been shown to have different effects on cancerous versus normal cells ([Batinic-Haberle et al., 2018](#R8)). One of these compounds, BMX-001, is being developed as a radioprotector to prevent normal tissue damage during cancer treatments. The drug is undergoing a clinical trial for patients with squamous cell head and neck cancer going through radiotherapy with concomitant cisplatin (National Clinical Trial (NCT) 02,990,468) and also as a neuroprotector for patients with gliomas receiving radiotherapy plus temozolomide to protect against cognitive deterioration and improve survival ([NCT02655601](https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02655601)) ([Zakeri et al., 2019](#R119)).

Similarly, another small molecule, SOD mimetic, GC4419 (Avasopasem manganese), is being developed to prevent radiation-induced toxicities. The product recently completed two clinical trials to mitigate severe oral mucositis in head and neck cancer patients undergoing radiation therapy and cisplatin ([NCT01921426](https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01921426), [NCT02508389](https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02508389)) ([Anderson et al., 2018](#R4)), where it reduced incidence, duration, and severity of oral mucositis without interfering with anticancer efficacy of the radiotherapy. Additional information on the Galera compound can be found in another manuscript in this special issue journal (Beardsley et al., 2022).

BIO300 - a synthetic flavonoid (genistein) nano-formulation of a SOD mimetic - is a promising MCM being developed as a mitigator of hematopoietic acute radiation syndrome (H-ARS) and late lung complications ([Singh and Seed, 2020](#R100)). Initially supported by DoD, the product has been tested in patients undergoing radiation therapy for non-small cell lung cancer ([NCT02567799](https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02567799)) to mitigate pneumonitis and fibrosis ([Prasanna et al., 2015](#R82); [Day et al., 2008](#R27); [Citrin et al., 2017](#R22); [Zakeri et al., 2019](#R119)). The product is currently being tested in COVID-19 patients with post-hospitalization lung complications (NCT 04,482,595).

Finally, the SOD mimetic AEOL 10,150 received U.S. government funding to inform its use as a mitigator of radiation-induced lung damage. The compound, also a Mn porphyrin, is protective in mouse ([Murigi et al., 2015](#R75)), hamster ([Sonis, 2001](#R103)), and nonhuman primate (NHP) ([MacVittie et al., 2017](#R65); [Garofalo et al., 2014](#R38)) models of radiation injury, with a proposed mechanism of action that involves reduction of innate immune response ([Cui et al., 2021](#R26)). Key to the potential use of this product in a space flight environment is the lack of toxicity observed in preclinical models despite continuous dosing over several months ([MacVittie et al., 2017](#R65)).

#### 6.1.6. Tempol

Another antioxidant agent that could also double as a dietary supplement is a stable, water-soluble nitroxide free radical ([Hahn et al., 1992](#R44)). Tempol as a radio-protector and mitigator has been studied for radiation oncology indications ([Hahn et al., 1994](#R45)), where it has been shown to have antioxidant activity in the protection of normal tissues and as a mitigator of late radiation-induced carcinogenesis known to arise after lower doses of exposure in a mouse model of injury ([Mitchell et al., 2012](#R71)). It is a viable option for long-term administration, having been delivered to irradiated and unirradiated preclinical models across their entire lifespan with no adverse outcomes.

### 6.2. Anti-inflammatories (non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, NSAIDs)

Along with chronic oxidative stress, chronic inflammation has been identified as a critical pathway in the development of cancer and cardiovascular, neurodegenerative, and autoimmune diseases. For this reason, anti-inflammatories are addressed here as potential therapies of interest to NASA.

#### 6.2.1. Aspirin

Researchers have reported that long-term use of aspirin significantly impacts cancer incidence and mortality ([Qiao et al., 2018](#R85)). Aspirin also reduces the incidence of cardiovascular events by ~20% in the general population and high-risk groups ([Mitrugno et al., 2017](#R72); [Camara Planek et al., 2020](#R15)). NASA has examined aspirin’s efficacy in reducing radiation-induced cancers, and cardiovascular, immune, and behavioral health effects. For example, in a human gastrointestinal (GI) cancer model, mice exposed to 28Si-ions and a diet supplemented with aspirin reported a significant reduction in a potent pro-inflammatory molecule but not a reduction in GI tumorigenesis ([Suman et al., 2021](#R106)). Another study assessed the ability of aspirin to protect mice exposed to a mixed field of neutrons and photons and a single or fractionated simulated GCR exposure ([Holden et al., 2021](#R46)). While data suggested that radiation-induced changes in systolic cardiac function and mitochondrial respiration were mitigated, aspirin did not benefit in preserving behavioral or cognitive performance. A significant risk associated with regular aspirin intake is GI bleeding; however, there is a lower risk of GI bleeding-associated morbidity and mortality in individuals younger than 65 years ([Patrignani and Patrono, 2016](#R78)), which correlates to the NASA astronaut age range.

#### 6.2.2. Celecoxib

Another easily accessible anti-inflammatory, celecoxib (a COX-2 inhibitor), has also shown success in mitigating lung injuries following irradiation ([Hunter et al., 2013](#R48)). The drug reduced lung toxicity when given to irradiated mice twice daily over 40 days. In addition, COX-2 inhibitors are being studied in humans undergoing thoracic irradiation ([Gore, 2004](#R41)). Because this drug is known to be safe in humans in a long-term dosing scenario, along with its use to relieve joint injuries, it represents a product that could be useful to protect astronauts from space radiation.

#### 6.2.3. CDDO-Me

Some NSAIDs can affect tumors and the tumor microenvironment by blocking cell proliferation and promoting apoptosis but have been implicated in adverse cardiovascular events ([Varga et al., 2017](#R108)). Other anti-inflammatory agents, such as CDDO-Me (bardoxolone methyl), act on the Nrf2 pathway, thereby upregulating an antioxidant response. CDDO-Me has demonstrated positive results in reducing tumor induction when tested in space radiation-simulated environments ([Eskiocak et al., 2010](#R35)), and protecting normal breast and lung cells from cesium irradiation ([El-Ashmawy et al., 2014](#R33)). The CDDO-ME compound was tested in several clinical trials, primarily for kidney ([NCT03918447](https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03918447)) and lung ([NCT02036970](https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02036970)) diseases, and also recently in COVID-19 patients ([NCT04494646](https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04494646)). The drug (an oral capsule) was safe and well-tolerated in these clinical studies. These agents, while promising, present challenges with the possibility of exacerbating cardiovascular events similar to over-the-counter NSAIDs and should be evaluated carefully for unintentional side effects. More information on this molecule can be found elsewhere in this special issue (Fornace & Shay).

### 6.3. Anti-apoptotics

A direct consequence of radiation damage is cellular apoptosis, also called programmed cell death or interphase death since cells usually die during interphase within a few hours of irradiation. The loss of normal nuclear structure and DNA degradation characterizes apoptosis, which occurs among various cell types at higher radiation doses ([Little, 2003](#R64)); however, it can be induced by relatively low doses of radiation in some cells ([Xin et al., 2014](#R114)). Products that modulate cellular apoptotic pathways have been tested with NIAID (and in some cases, NCI and NASA) support, demonstrating preclinical efficacy for ARS. These include a modified monoclonal anti-ceramide antibody approach (CX-01) ([Rotolo et al., 2012](#R88)), a GS-nitroxide (JP4–039) ([Goff et al., 2011](#R40)), and a pre-implantation factor therapy (sPIF) ([Shainer et al., 2016](#R93)). Although these drugs were tested in high-dose irradiation animal models, and their safety in a long-term use scenario is unknown, they represent novel compounds that could impact outcomes of NASA interest after low dose irradiation.

### 6.4. Senotherapeutics

Senescence is a process in which cells lose their proliferative capacity but remain metabolically active. Senescent cells display specific molecular, biochemical, and morphological features, and cancer treatments such as radiation ([Shao et al., 2014](#R94)) and chemotherapy ([Ewald et al., 2010](#R36)) induce senescence in both normal and cancer cells. Because of an increased understanding of multiple roles in cancer, cellular senescence is a vital target in the fight against cancer ([Prasanna et al., 2021](#R84)). Similarly, the role of senescent cells in radiation-associated aging of hematopoietic stem cells has led to the study of senolytic drugs as potential MCMs for ARS ([Chang et al., 2016](#R18)). While senescence is an essential tumor-suppressive phenomenon, senescent cells share hallmark features with cancer cells, including developing resistance to therapy, evasion of immune surveillance, and genomic instability. Thus, shared vulnerabilities of senescent cells with cancer cells could be exploited to develop novel approaches to prevent and mitigate carcinogenesis. A summary of senotherapeutics, including drug classes and developmental stage, mechanisms of action, critical knowledge gaps, pitfalls, challenges, and opportunities in their development as anticancer agents is available ([Prasanna et al., 2021](#R84)), and NIH has identified several broad areas as a blueprint in senescence research ([Roy et al., 2020](#R89)). In the context of radiation, the effects of dose, dose rate, radiation type, and the response kinetics of cellular senescence have not been fully understood.

### 6.5. Statins

Statins are a class of drugs commonly used to treat hypercholesterolemia and atherosclerosis. They offer cross-risk mitigation due to their pleiotropic effects that target neuroprotection, antioxidant modulation, and effects on anti-inflammatory pathways. In studies where atorvastatin was delivered chronically, there was minimal radiation mitigation; however, when combined with an ACE inhibitor (ramipril), the two drugs mitigated radiation-induced disruption of neurogenic signaling ([Jenrow et al., 2011](#R52)). Other studies found that lovastatin could interfere with the development of lung complications after large doses of irradiation ([Williams et al., 2004](#R113)), and mitigate radiation-induced damage to the salivary gland in murine models ([Xu et al., 2016](#R115)). Simvastatin is undergoing clinical trial testing in patients receiving radiation therapy for brain metastases, as a means of neuroprotection ([NCT02104193](https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02104193)). Available human data on statins suggests a radioprotective mechanism in reducing GI toxicity ([Wedlake et al., 2012](#R112)); however, a Danish study looking at the risk of statin use reported an increase in ovarian mucinous tumors associated with their use ([Baandrup et al., 2015](#R6)). In addition, there is an established link between adverse side effects and statin use, which could interfere with the ability of NASA personnel to carry out flight tasks.[10](#FN12) Nevertheless, given the benefits and proven long-term use of statins, NASA could consider this MCM when planning studies to evaluate radioprotectors and mitigators.

### 6.6. ACE inhibitors

The ability of ACE inhibitors to serve as radiation mitigators has been well described in studies reaching back to the 1980s ([Ward et al., 1988](#R111)). These products, licensed as anti-hypertensives, are used extensively in humans, so their safety profile, even with chronic use, has been well-characterized ([Sidorenkov and Navis, 2014](#R95)). A variety of ACE inhibitors (e.g., lisinopril, captopril, enalapril, ramipril, etc.) have shown efficacy in mitigating high-dose radiation injuries to the lungs ([Kma et al., 2012](#R57); [Medhora et al., 2012](#R67)), kidneys ([Moulder et al., 2014](#R74); [Moulder et al., 2011](#R73)), and other organs ([Kohl et al., 2007](#R58); [Jenrow et al., 2010](#R51)). These products could be beneficial in the space environment, even at low doses, to interfere with injury processes induced by irradiation in these tissues.

### 6.7. Antibiotics

Antibiotics have been tested in acute radiation exposure scenarios. They have demonstrated efficacy in attenuating ARS, with antimicrobials such as tetracyclines ([Kim et al., 2009](#R55); [Epperly et al., 2010](#R34)) and fluoroquinolones ([Kim et al., 2009](#R55)) showing promise as radiation mitigators. Antibiotics such as minocycline are also in clinical trials as neuroprotective treatments for patients undergoing metastatic brain tumor radiotherapy ([Afshari et al., 2020](#R1)). Further, NASA has investigated use of minocycline as a prophylactic MCM due to its antibiotic, anti-apoptotic, anti-inflammatory, and immunomodulatory properties ([Mehrotra et al., 2013](#R68); [Zhang et al., 2014](#R120)). A second-generation, semi-synthetic tetracycline that has been used clinically for decades, minocycline is considered a safe drug in humans ([Garrido-Mesa et al., 2013](#R39)). Work performed by the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) showed that ciprofloxacin, a quinolone antibiotic, improved survival and diminished symptoms in irradiated mice. It also improved neutrophil counts and function ([Booth et al., 2012](#R13)). In addition, ciprofloxacin enhanced recovery from hemorrhagic radiation proctitis in radiotherapy patients ([Sahakitrungruang et al., 2011](#R90)). Therefore, ciprofloxacin, with its ability to comprehensively modulate inflammation, immune signaling, and wound healing, has potential to mitigate radiation injuries arising from space-based exposures. Although this MCM could offer cross-risk protection for radiation-induced effects and the immune system to mitigate infection, it has been reported to increase intracranial hypertension ([Milanlioglu and Torlak, 2011](#R69)), which would not be acceptable for the crew since this complication is a risk outlined in the Human Research Roadmap. NASA should explore discussions with Human Health and Countermeasure (HHC) experts regarding this issue and investigate doses associated with intracranial hypertension.

## 7\. Regulatory considerations

### 7.1. Working with the FDA for product approval

Understanding regulatory compliance is essential to successful development of products to address radiation normal tissue injuries, whether from planned (e.g., radiotherapy), unplanned (e.g., during a public health emergency) or contingent (space flight) exposure. The FDA is the U.S. regulatory agency tasked with protecting public health and ensuring the safety, efficacy, and security of drugs, biologics, and medical devices. Working within these regulatory guidelines, NIAID and NCI support research to develop therapeutics for FDA approval, whereas NASA has other mechanisms to allow for approval of products for administration to space flight personnel. Despite this different process, there is information to be gained by NASA through understanding the standard, NCI approach for therapies and the NIAID use of the FDA Animal Rule (21 CFR 314.600–650 for drugs; 21 CFR 601.90–95 for biologics), which was heavily influenced by the traditional clinical approval pathways used by NCI, and covers MCMs for which “human efficacy studies are not ethical or feasible” ([Food and Drug Administration, 2015](#R37)). Please see the manuscript by Chang et al. elsewhere in this special issue for additional information about this unique regulatory pathway for MCM development.

### 7.2. NASA’s regulatory approach

Given NASA’s unique environment, it is not feasible to perform experiments representative of what astronauts will be exposed to during space travel, and epidemiology provides minimal information. The level of FDA approval required for the NASA crew is determined by the NASA Office of Chief Health and Medical Officer. If an MCM shows promise as a radioprotector or a mitigator, it goes through the NASA Transition to Operations Review Process (TORP) to obtain approval for administration to crew for the demonstrated indication.[11](#FN13) Similar to, and in many ways patterned on FDA procedures, the TORP is designed to assess effectiveness and operational readiness of human health, human performance, and medical research and technology products and deliverables. These reviews require 1) a detailed description of the deliverable, its intended use, and a description of how it addresses a NASA-identified critical risk, medical, health, performance issues, or application; 2) data demonstrating efficacy or utility; 3) data demonstrating operational validation; 4) an implementation plan of how it is to be used or applied, 5) an analysis of mission resources necessary for implementation; and 6) a summary of developmental processes and milestones achieved. Similar to FDA Animal Rule approval, the NASA pathway requires extensive evidence in animal models, clinical safety data in humans and takes cues from the development of other radio-therapeutics, and is also based on traditional clinical approval processes used for NCI approaches.

## 8\. Conclusion

There are several terrestrial-based radiation injury prevention products, either in routine clinical use or undergoing testing through other U.S. government programs such as NCI and NIAID, that could be used to address the health needs of humans in space and vice versa. Fortunately, careful coordination between funding agencies and scientists in the field has enabled the advancement of many approaches that could be useful for both NIH and NASA needs. Looking to the future, commercial space tourism is already a reality for sub-orbital flights and low-earth orbits, with private astronaut missions to the International Space Station currently underway, and moon trips expected during the next few decades. Although exposures may be limited due to shorter flight times, people in the general population will still be exposed to space radiation during these flights. As there are diverse tissue-specific cancer risk rankings across sex and race, including sex-specific organ risks, all of these factors will need to be considered as more people take these flights ([Cucinotta and Saganti, 2022](#R25)). Continued collaboration between organizations tasked with developing approaches to address radiation-induced injuries will ensure that products with the greatest promise are studied across all agencies’ mission-specific requirements and that human health will be well-addressed by NASA for their future long-term space flights. Similarly, advances made by NASA and their funded investigators can help NIH in their efforts to address radiotherapy complications and protection of civilians from other unintended radiation exposures.

## Funding support

Author salaries were supported by NASA’s Biological and Physical Sciences Division, NIAID’s RNCP, and NCI’s RRP. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.

## Footnotes

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors have no competing interest to declare and wrote this manuscript in the course of their normal government duties.

Disclosures

This article represents the opinion of the authors. It does not represent the opinion or policy of the U.S. Government Agencies, NIAID, NCI, and NASA of which the authors are employees.

## References

1.  Afshari AR, Mollazadeh H, Sahebkar A, 2020. Minocycline in treating glioblastoma multiforme far beyond a conventional antibiotic. J. Oncol. 2020, 8659802. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/8659802)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7519463/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33014057/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Oncol&title=Minocycline%20in%20treating%20glioblastoma%20multiforme%20far%20beyond%20a%20conventional%20antibiotic&author=AR%20Afshari&author=H%20Mollazadeh&author=A%20Sahebkar&volume=2020&publication_year=2020&pages=8659802&pmid=33014057&doi=10.1155/2020/8659802&)\]
2.  Ali YF, Cucinotta FA, Ning-Ang L, Zhou G, 2020. Cancer risk of low dose ionizing radiation. Front. Phys. \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Front.%20Phys&title=Cancer%20risk%20of%20low%20dose%20ionizing%20radiation&author=YF%20Ali&author=FA%20Cucinotta&author=L%20Ning-Ang&author=G%20Zhou&publication_year=2020&)\]
3.  Amini P, Saffar H, Nourani MR, Motevaseli E, Najafi M, Ali Taheri R, et al. , 2018. Curcumin mitigates radiation-induced lung pneumonitis and fibrosis in rats. Int. J. Mol. Cell. Med. 7 (4), 212–219. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.22088/IJMCM.BUMS.7.4.212)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6709933/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31516880/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.%20J.%20Mol.%20Cell.%20Med&title=Curcumin%20mitigates%20radiation-induced%20lung%20pneumonitis%20and%20fibrosis%20in%20rats&author=P%20Amini&author=H%20Saffar&author=MR%20Nourani&author=E%20Motevaseli&author=M%20Najafi&volume=7&issue=4&publication_year=2018&pages=212-219&pmid=31516880&doi=10.22088/IJMCM.BUMS.7.4.212&)\]
4.  Anderson CM, Sonis ST, Lee CM, Adkins D, Allen BG, Sun W, et al. , 2018. Phase 1b/2a Trial of the superoxide dismutase mimetic GC4419 to reduce chemoradiotherapy-induced oral mucositis in patients with oral cavity or oropharyngeal carcinoma. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 100 (2), 427–435. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijrobp.2017.10.019)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6430109/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29174131/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.%20J.%20Radiat.%20Oncol.%20Biol.%20Phys&title=Phase%201b/2a%20Trial%20of%20the%20superoxide%20dismutase%20mimetic%20GC4419%20to%20reduce%20chemoradiotherapy-induced%20oral%20mucositis%20in%20patients%20with%20oral%20cavity%20or%20oropharyngeal%20carcinoma&author=CM%20Anderson&author=ST%20Sonis&author=CM%20Lee&author=D%20Adkins&author=BG%20Allen&volume=100&issue=2&publication_year=2018&pages=427-435&pmid=29174131&doi=10.1016/j.ijrobp.2017.10.019&)\]
5.  Azzam EI, Jay-Gerin JP, Pain D, 2012. Ionizing radiation-induced metabolic oxidative stress and prolonged cell injury. Cancer Lett. 327 (1–2), 48–60. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.canlet.2011.12.012)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3980444/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22182453/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cancer%20Lett&title=Ionizing%20radiation-induced%20metabolic%20oxidative%20stress%20and%20prolonged%20cell%20injury&author=EI%20Azzam&author=JP%20Jay-Gerin&author=D%20Pain&volume=327&issue=1%E2%80%932&publication_year=2012&pages=48-60&pmid=22182453&doi=10.1016/j.canlet.2011.12.012&)\]
6.  Baandrup L, Dehlendorff C, Friis S, Olsen JH, Kjær SK, 2015. Statin use and risk for ovarian cancer a Danish nationwide case-control study. Br. J. Cancer 112 (1), 157–161. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/bjc.2014.574)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4453615/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25393364/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Br.%20J.%20Cancer&title=Statin%20use%20and%20risk%20for%20ovarian%20cancer%20a%20Danish%20nationwide%20case-control%20study&author=L%20Baandrup&author=C%20Dehlendorff&author=S%20Friis&author=JH%20Olsen&author=SK%20Kj%C3%A6r&volume=112&issue=1&publication_year=2015&pages=157-161&pmid=25393364&doi=10.1038/bjc.2014.574&)\]
7.  Batinic-Haberle I, Tome ME, 2019. Thiol regulation by Mn porphyrins, commonly known as SOD mimics. Redox. Biol. 25, 101139. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.redox.2019.101139)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6859569/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31126869/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Redox.%20Biol&title=Thiol%20regulation%20by%20Mn%20porphyrins,%20commonly%20known%20as%20SOD%20mimics&author=I%20Batinic-Haberle&author=ME%20Tome&volume=25&publication_year=2019&pages=101139&pmid=31126869&doi=10.1016/j.redox.2019.101139&)\]
8.  Batinic-Haberle I, Tovmasyan A, Spasojevic I, 2018. Mn porphyrin-based redox-active drugs differential effects as cancer therapeutics and protectors of normal tissue against oxidative injury. Antioxid. Redox. Signal. 29 (16), 1691–1724. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1089/ars.2017.7453)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6207162/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29926755/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Antioxid.%20Redox.%20Signal&title=Mn%20porphyrin-based%20redox-active%20drugs%20differential%20effects%20as%20cancer%20therapeutics%20and%20protectors%20of%20normal%20tissue%20against%20oxidative%20injury&author=I%20Batinic-Haberle&author=A%20Tovmasyan&author=I%20Spasojevic&volume=29&issue=16&publication_year=2018&pages=1691-1724&pmid=29926755&doi=10.1089/ars.2017.7453&)\]
9.  Beck HL, Bouville A, Simon SL, Anspaugh LR, Thiessen KM, Shinkarev S, et al. , 2022. A method for estimating the deposition density of fallout on the ground and on vegetation from a low-yield, low-altitude nuclear detonation. Health Phys. 122 (1), 21–53. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/HP.0000000000001496)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8677616/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34898515/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Health%20Phys&title=A%20method%20for%20estimating%20the%20deposition%20density%20of%20fallout%20on%20the%20ground%20and%20on%20vegetation%20from%20a%20low-yield,%20low-altitude%20nuclear%20detonation&author=HL%20Beck&author=A%20Bouville&author=SL%20Simon&author=LR%20Anspaugh&author=KM%20Thiessen&volume=122&issue=1&publication_year=2022&pages=21-53&pmid=34898515&doi=10.1097/HP.0000000000001496&)\]
10.  Berman AT, Turowski J, Mick R, Cengel K, Farnese N, Basel-Brown L, et al. , 2013. Dietary flaxseed in non-small cell lung cancer patients receiving chemoradiation. J. Pulm. Respir. Med. 3 (4), 154. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.4172/2161-105X.1000154)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3932620/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24575360/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Pulm.%20Respir.%20Med&title=Dietary%20flaxseed%20in%20non-small%20cell%20lung%20cancer%20patients%20receiving%20chemoradiation&author=AT%20Berman&author=J%20Turowski&author=R%20Mick&author=K%20Cengel&author=N%20Farnese&volume=3&issue=4&publication_year=2013&pages=154&pmid=24575360&doi=10.4172/2161-105X.1000154&)\]
11.  Berrington de Gonzalez A, Daniels RD, Cardis E, Cullings HM, Gilbert E, Hauptmann M, et al. , 2020. Epidemiological studies of low-dose ionizing radiation and cancer rationale and framework for the monograph and overview of eligible studies. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. Monogr. 2020 (56), 97–113. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/jncimonographs/lgaa009)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7610154/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32657348/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Natl.%20Cancer%20Inst.%20Monogr&title=Epidemiological%20studies%20of%20low-dose%20ionizing%20radiation%20and%20cancer%20rationale%20and%20framework%20for%20the%20monograph%20and%20overview%20of%20eligible%20studies&author=A%20Berrington%20de%20Gonzalez&author=RD%20Daniels&author=E%20Cardis&author=HM%20Cullings&author=E%20Gilbert&volume=2020&issue=56&publication_year=2020&pages=97-113&pmid=32657348&doi=10.1093/jncimonographs/lgaa009&)\]
12.  Bluethmann SM, Mariotto AB, Rowland JH, 2016. Anticipating the “silver tsunami” prevalence trajectories and comorbidity burden among older cancer survivors in the United States. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomarkers Prev. 25 (7), 1029–1036. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-16-0133)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4933329/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27371756/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cancer%20Epidemiol.%20Biomarkers%20Prev&title=Anticipating%20the%20%E2%80%9Csilver%20tsunami%E2%80%9D%20prevalence%20trajectories%20and%20comorbidity%20burden%20among%20older%20cancer%20survivors%20in%20the%20United%20States&author=SM%20Bluethmann&author=AB%20Mariotto&author=JH%20Rowland&volume=25&issue=7&publication_year=2016&pages=1029-1036&pmid=27371756&doi=10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-16-0133&)\]
13.  Booth C, Tudor G, Tonge N, Shea-Donohue T, MacVittie TJ, 2012. Evidence of delayed gastrointestinal syndrome in high-dose irradiated mice. Health Phys. 103 (4), 400–410. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/hp.0b013e31826530e2)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3551349/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23091877/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Health%20Phys&title=Evidence%20of%20delayed%20gastrointestinal%20syndrome%20in%20high-dose%20irradiated%20mice&author=C%20Booth&author=G%20Tudor&author=N%20Tonge&author=T%20Shea-Donohue&author=TJ%20MacVittie&volume=103&issue=4&publication_year=2012&pages=400-410&pmid=23091877&doi=10.1097/hp.0b013e31826530e2&)\]
14.  Califf RM, 2018. Biomarker definitions and their applications. Exp. Biol. Med. (Maywood) 243 (3), 213–221. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1177/1535370217750088)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5813875/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29405771/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Exp.%20Biol.%20Med.%20\(Maywood\)&title=Biomarker%20definitions%20and%20their%20applications&author=RM%20Califf&volume=243&issue=3&publication_year=2018&pages=213-221&pmid=29405771&doi=10.1177/1535370217750088&)\]
15.  Camara Planek MI, Silver AJ, Volgman AS, Okwuosa TM, 2020. Exploratory review of the role of statins, colchicine, and aspirin for the prevention of radiation-associated cardiovascular disease and mortality. J. Am. Heart Assoc. 9 (2), e014668. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/JAHA.119.014668)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7033839/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31960749/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Am.%20Heart%20Assoc&title=Exploratory%20review%20of%20the%20role%20of%20statins,%20colchicine,%20and%20aspirin%20for%20the%20prevention%20of%20radiation-associated%20cardiovascular%20disease%20and%20mortality&author=MI%20Camara%20Planek&author=AJ%20Silver&author=AS%20Volgman&author=TM%20Okwuosa&volume=9&issue=2&publication_year=2020&pages=e014668&pmid=31960749&doi=10.1161/JAHA.119.014668&)\]
16.  Carnell LS, Homer M, Hoots K, Meeks H, Prasanna PGS, Rios C, et al. , 26 January 2017. Medical countermeasures for radiation induced health effects report of an Interagency Panel Session held at the NASA Human Research Program Investigator\\’s Workshop. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 2019, 1–8. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1080/09553002.2019.1665214)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8463010/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31490103/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.%20J.%20Radiat.%20Biol&title=Medical%20countermeasures%20for%20radiation%20induced%20health%20effects%20report%20of%20an%20Interagency%20Panel%20Session%20held%20at%20the%20NASA%20Human%20Research%20Program%20Investigator%5C%E2%80%99s%20Workshop&author=LS%20Carnell&author=M%20Homer&author=K%20Hoots&author=H%20Meeks&author=PGS%20Prasanna&volume=2019&publication_year=2017&pages=1-8&pmid=31490103&doi=10.1080/09553002.2019.1665214&)\]
17.  Cassatt DR, Gorovets A, Karimi-Shah B, Roberts R, Price PW, Satyamitra MM, et al. , 2022. A trans-agency workshop on the pathophysiology of radiation-induced lung injury. Radiat. Res. 197 (4), 415–433. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1667/RADE-21-00127.1)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9648426/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34342637/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Res&title=A%20trans-agency%20workshop%20on%20the%20pathophysiology%20of%20radiation-induced%20lung%20injury&author=DR%20Cassatt&author=A%20Gorovets&author=B%20Karimi-Shah&author=R%20Roberts&author=PW%20Price&volume=197&issue=4&publication_year=2022&pages=415-433&pmid=34342637&doi=10.1667/RADE-21-00127.1&)\]
18.  Chang J, Wang Y, Shao L, Laberge RM, Demaria M, Campisi J, et al. , 2016. Clearance of senescent cells by ABT263 rejuvenates aged hematopoietic stem cells in mice. Nat. Med. 22 (1), 78–83. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.4010)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4762215/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26657143/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat.%20Med&title=Clearance%20of%20senescent%20cells%20by%20ABT263%20rejuvenates%20aged%20hematopoietic%20stem%20cells%20in%20mice&author=J%20Chang&author=Y%20Wang&author=L%20Shao&author=RM%20Laberge&author=M%20Demaria&volume=22&issue=1&publication_year=2016&pages=78-83&pmid=26657143&doi=10.1038/nm.4010&)\]
19.  Changizi V, Haeri SA, Abbasi S, Rajabi Z, Mirdoraghi M, 2019. Radioprotective effects of vitamin A against gamma radiation in mouse bone marrow cells. MethodsX 6, 714–717. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mex.2019.03.020)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6458447/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31008064/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=MethodsX&title=Radioprotective%20effects%20of%20vitamin%20A%20against%20gamma%20radiation%20in%20mouse%20bone%20marrow%20cells&author=V%20Changizi&author=SA%20Haeri&author=S%20Abbasi&author=Z%20Rajabi&author=M%20Mirdoraghi&volume=6&publication_year=2019&pages=714-717&pmid=31008064&doi=10.1016/j.mex.2019.03.020&)\]
20.  Chatterjee S, Pietrofesa RA, Park K, Tao JQ, Carabe-Fernandez A, Berman AT, et al. , 2019. LGM2605 reduces space radiation-induced NLRP3 inflammasome activation and damage in in vitro lung vascular networks. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 20 (1). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms20010176)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6337675/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30621290/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.%20J.%20Mol.%20Sci&title=LGM2605%20reduces%20space%20radiation-induced%20NLRP3%20inflammasome%20activation%20and%20damage%20in%20in%20vitro%20lung%20vascular%20networks&author=S%20Chatterjee&author=RA%20Pietrofesa&author=K%20Park&author=JQ%20Tao&author=A%20Carabe-Fernandez&volume=20&issue=1&publication_year=2019&pmid=30621290&doi=10.3390/ijms20010176&)\]
21.  Christofidou-Solomidou M, Tyagi S, Tan KS, Hagan S, Pietrofesa R, Dukes F, et al. , 2011. Dietary flaxseed administered post thoracic radiation treatment improves survival and mitigates radiation-induced pneumonopathy in mice. BMC Cancer 11, 269. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2407-11-269)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3146937/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21702963/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=BMC%20Cancer&title=Dietary%20flaxseed%20administered%20post%20thoracic%20radiation%20treatment%20improves%20survival%20and%20mitigates%20radiation-induced%20pneumonopathy%20in%20mice&author=M%20Christofidou-Solomidou&author=S%20Tyagi&author=KS%20Tan&author=S%20Hagan&author=R%20Pietrofesa&volume=11&publication_year=2011&pages=269&pmid=21702963&doi=10.1186/1471-2407-11-269&)\]
22.  Citrin DE, Prasanna PGS, Walker AJ, Freeman ML, Eke I, Barcellos-Hoff MH, et al. , 2017. Radiation-induced fibrosis mechanisms and opportunities to mitigate. Report of an NCI workshop, September 19, 2016. Radiat. Res. 188 (1), 1–20. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1667/RR14784.1)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5558616/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28489488/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Res&title=Radiation-induced%20fibrosis%20mechanisms%20and%20opportunities%20to%20mitigate.%20Report%20of%20an%20NCI%20workshop,%20September%2019,%202016&author=DE%20Citrin&author=PGS%20Prasanna&author=AJ%20Walker&author=ML%20Freeman&author=I%20Eke&volume=188&issue=1&publication_year=2017&pages=1-20&pmid=28489488&doi=10.1667/RR14784.1&)\]
23.  Coleman CN, Prasanna PGS, Bernhard EJ, Buchsbaum JC, Ahmed MM, Capala J, et al. , 2018. Accurate, precision radiation medicine a meta-strategy for impacting cancer care, global health, and nuclear policy and mitigating radiation injury from necessary medical use, space exploration, and potential terrorism. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 101 (2), 250–253. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijrobp.2018.02.001)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29726348/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.%20J.%20Radiat.%20Oncol.%20Biol.%20Phys&title=Accurate,%20precision%20radiation%20medicine%20a%20meta-strategy%20for%20impacting%20cancer%20care,%20global%20health,%20and%20nuclear%20policy%20and%20mitigating%20radiation%20injury%20from%20necessary%20medical%20use,%20space%20exploration,%20and%20potential%20terrorism&author=CN%20Coleman&author=PGS%20Prasanna&author=EJ%20Bernhard&author=JC%20Buchsbaum&author=MM%20Ahmed&volume=101&issue=2&publication_year=2018&pages=250-253&pmid=29726348&doi=10.1016/j.ijrobp.2018.02.001&)\]
24.  Coleman CN, Buchsbaum JC, Prasanna PGS, Capala J, Obcemea C, Espey MG, et al. , 2021. Moving forward in the next decade radiation oncology sciences for patient-centered cancer care. JNCI Cancer Spectr. 5 (4). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/jncics/pkab046)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8328099/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34350377/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=JNCI%20Cancer%20Spectr&title=Moving%20forward%20in%20the%20next%20decade%20radiation%20oncology%20sciences%20for%20patient-centered%20cancer%20care&author=CN%20Coleman&author=JC%20Buchsbaum&author=PGS%20Prasanna&author=J%20Capala&author=C%20Obcemea&volume=5&issue=4&publication_year=2021&pmid=34350377&doi=10.1093/jncics/pkab046&)\]
25.  Cucinotta FA, Saganti PB, 2022. Race and ethnic group dependent space radiation cancer risk predictions. Sci. Rep. 12 (1), 2028. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-06105-x)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8821552/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35132138/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Sci.%20Rep&title=Race%20and%20ethnic%20group%20dependent%20space%20radiation%20cancer%20risk%20predictions&author=FA%20Cucinotta&author=PB%20Saganti&volume=12&issue=1&publication_year=2022&pages=2028&pmid=35132138&doi=10.1038/s41598-022-06105-x&)\]
26.  Cui W, Zhang P, Hankey KG, Xiao M, Farese AM, MacVittie TJ, 2021. AEOL 10150 alleviates radiation-induced innate immune responses in non-human primate lung tissue. Health Phys. 121 (4), 331–344. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/HP.0000000000001443)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8601036/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34546215/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Health%20Phys&title=AEOL%2010150%20alleviates%20radiation-induced%20innate%20immune%20responses%20in%20non-human%20primate%20lung%20tissue&author=W%20Cui&author=P%20Zhang&author=KG%20Hankey&author=M%20Xiao&author=AM%20Farese&volume=121&issue=4&publication_year=2021&pages=331-344&pmid=34546215&doi=10.1097/HP.0000000000001443&)\]
27.  Day RM, Barshishat-Kupper M, Mog SR, McCart EA, Prasanna PG, Davis TA, et al. , 2008. Genistein protects against biomarkers of delayed lung sequelae in mice surviving high-dose total body irradiation. J. Radiat. Res. 49 (4), 361–372. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1269/jrr.07121)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2575019/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18434686/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Radiat.%20Res&title=Genistein%20protects%20against%20biomarkers%20of%20delayed%20lung%20sequelae%20in%20mice%20surviving%20high-dose%20total%20body%20irradiation&author=RM%20Day&author=M%20Barshishat-Kupper&author=SR%20Mog&author=EA%20McCart&author=PG%20Prasanna&volume=49&issue=4&publication_year=2008&pages=361-372&pmid=18434686&doi=10.1269/jrr.07121&)\]
28.  De Filipp Z, Glotzbecker B, Luque L, Kim HT, Mitchell KM, Cheuvront SN, et al. , 2021. Randomized study of Enterade® to reduce diarrhea in patients receiving high-dose chemotherapy and autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Asian Pac. J. Cancer Prev. 22 (1), 301–304. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.31557/APJCP.2021.22.1.301)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8184175/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33507712/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Asian%20Pac.%20J.%20Cancer%20Prev&title=Randomized%20study%20of%20Enterade%C2%AE%20to%20reduce%20diarrhea%20in%20patients%20receiving%20high-dose%20chemotherapy%20and%20autologous%20hematopoietic%20stem%20cell%20transplantation&author=Z%20De%20Filipp&author=B%20Glotzbecker&author=L%20Luque&author=HT%20Kim&author=KM%20Mitchell&volume=22&issue=1&publication_year=2021&pages=301-304&pmid=33507712&doi=10.31557/APJCP.2021.22.1.301&)\]
29.  DiCarlo AL, Cassatt DR, Dowling WE, Esker JL, Hewitt JA, Selivanova O, et al. , 2018. Challenges and benefits of repurposing products for use during a radiation public health emergency lessons learned from biological threats and other disease treatments. Radiat. Res. 190 (6), 659–676. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1667/RR15137.1)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8466052/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30160600/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Res&title=Challenges%20and%20benefits%20of%20repurposing%20products%20for%20use%20during%20a%20radiation%20public%20health%20emergency%20lessons%20learned%20from%20biological%20threats%20and%20other%20disease%20treatments&author=AL%20DiCarlo&author=DR%20Cassatt&author=WE%20Dowling&author=JL%20Esker&author=JA%20Hewitt&volume=190&issue=6&publication_year=2018&pages=659-676&pmid=30160600&doi=10.1667/RR15137.1&)\]
30.  DiCarlo AL, Horta ZP, Aldrich JT, Jakubowski AA, Skinner WK, Case CM, 2019. Use of growth factors and other cytokines for treatment of injuries during a radiation public health emergency. Radiat. Res. 192 (1), 99–120. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1667/RR15363.1)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8381615/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31081742/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Res&title=Use%20of%20growth%20factors%20and%20other%20cytokines%20for%20treatment%20of%20injuries%20during%20a%20radiation%20public%20health%20emergency&author=AL%20DiCarlo&author=ZP%20Horta&author=JT%20Aldrich&author=AA%20Jakubowski&author=WK%20Skinner&volume=192&issue=1&publication_year=2019&pages=99-120&pmid=31081742&doi=10.1667/RR15363.1&)\]
31.  DiCarlo AL, Bandremer AC, Hollingsworth BA, Kasim S, Laniyonu A, Todd NF, et al. , 2020. Cutaneous radiation injuries models, assessment and treatments. Radiat. Res. 194 (3), 315–344. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1667/RADE-20-00120.1)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7525796/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32857831/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Res&title=Cutaneous%20radiation%20injuries%20models,%20assessment%20and%20treatments&author=AL%20DiCarlo&author=AC%20Bandremer&author=BA%20Hollingsworth&author=S%20Kasim&author=A%20Laniyonu&volume=194&issue=3&publication_year=2020&pages=315-344&pmid=32857831&doi=10.1667/RADE-20-00120.1&)\]
32.  Drozdovitch V, Minenko V, Golovanov I, Khrutchinsky A, Kukhta T, Kutsen S, et al. , 2015. Thyroid dose estimates for a cohort of Belarusian children exposed to (131)I from the chernobyl accident assessment of uncertainties. Radiat. Res. 184 (2), 203–218. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1667/rr13791.1)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4548301/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26207684/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Res&title=Thyroid%20dose%20estimates%20for%20a%20cohort%20of%20Belarusian%20children%20exposed%20to%20\(131\)I%20from%20the%20chernobyl%20accident%20assessment%20of%20uncertainties&author=V%20Drozdovitch&author=V%20Minenko&author=I%20Golovanov&author=A%20Khrutchinsky&author=T%20Kukhta&volume=184&issue=2&publication_year=2015&pages=203-218&pmid=26207684&doi=10.1667/rr13791.1&)\]
33.  El-Ashmawy M, Delgado O, Cardentey A, Wright WE, Shay JW, 2014. CDDO-Me protects normal lung and breast epithelial cells but not cancer cells from radiation. PLoS One 9 (12), e115600. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0115600)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4275221/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25536195/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20One&title=CDDO-Me%20protects%20normal%20lung%20and%20breast%20epithelial%20cells%20but%20not%20cancer%20cells%20from%20radiation&author=M%20El-Ashmawy&author=O%20Delgado&author=A%20Cardentey&author=WE%20Wright&author=JW%20Shay&volume=9&issue=12&publication_year=2014&pages=e115600&pmid=25536195&doi=10.1371/journal.pone.0115600&)\]
34.  Epperly MW, Franicola D, Shields D, Rwigema JC, Stone B, Zhang X, et al. Screening of antimicrobial agents for in vitro radiation protection and mitigation capacity, including those used in supportive care regimens for bone marrow transplant recipients. In Vivo (Brooklyn). 2010;24(1)9–19. \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3039923/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20133970/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=In%20Vivo%20\(Brooklyn\)&title=Screening%20of%20antimicrobial%20agents%20for%20in%20vitro%20radiation%20protection%20and%20mitigation%20capacity,%20including%20those%20used%20in%20supportive%20care%20regimens%20for%20bone%20marrow%20transplant%20recipients&author=MW%20Epperly&author=D%20Franicola&author=D%20Shields&author=JC%20Rwigema&author=B%20Stone&volume=24&issue=1&publication_year=2010&pages=9-19&pmid=20133970&)\]
35.  Eskiocak U, Kim SB, Roig AI, Kitten E, Batten K, Cornelius C, et al. , 2010. CDDO-Me protects against space radiation-induced transformation of human colon epithelial cells. Radiat. Res. 174 (1), 27–36. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1667/RR2155.1)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20681796/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Res&title=CDDO-Me%20protects%20against%20space%20radiation-induced%20transformation%20of%20human%20colon%20epithelial%20cells&author=U%20Eskiocak&author=SB%20Kim&author=AI%20Roig&author=E%20Kitten&author=K%20Batten&volume=174&issue=1&publication_year=2010&pages=27-36&pmid=20681796&doi=10.1667/RR2155.1&)\]
36.  Ewald JA, Desotelle JA, Wilding G, Jarrard DF, 2010. Therapy-induced senescence in cancer. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 102 (20), 1536–1546. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djq364)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2957429/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20858887/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Natl.%20Cancer%20Inst&title=Therapy-induced%20senescence%20in%20cancer&author=JA%20Ewald&author=JA%20Desotelle&author=G%20Wilding&author=DF%20Jarrard&volume=102&issue=20&publication_year=2010&pages=1536-1546&pmid=20858887&doi=10.1093/jnci/djq364&)\]
37.  Food and Drug Administration, 2015. Product Development Under the Animal Rule. Guidance for Industry. Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research. Silver Spring, MD. \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Guidance%20for%20Industry&publication_year=2015&)\]
38.  Garofalo M, Bennett A, Farese AM, Harper J, Ward A, Taylor-Howell C, et al. , 2014. The delayed pulmonary syndrome following acute high-dose irradiation a rhesus macaque model. Health Phys. 106 (1), 56–72. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/HP.0b013e3182a32b3f)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24276550/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Health%20Phys&title=The%20delayed%20pulmonary%20syndrome%20following%20acute%20high-dose%20irradiation%20a%20rhesus%20macaque%20model&author=M%20Garofalo&author=A%20Bennett&author=AM%20Farese&author=J%20Harper&author=A%20Ward&volume=106&issue=1&publication_year=2014&pages=56-72&pmid=24276550&doi=10.1097/HP.0b013e3182a32b3f&)\]
39.  Garrido-Mesa N, Zarzuelo A, Gálvez J, 2013. What is behind the non-antibiotic properties of minocycline. Pharmacol. Res. 67 (1), 18–30. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phrs.2012.10.006)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23085382/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacol.%20Res&title=What%20is%20behind%20the%20non-antibiotic%20properties%20of%20minocycline&author=N%20Garrido-Mesa&author=A%20Zarzuelo&author=J%20G%C3%A1lvez&volume=67&issue=1&publication_year=2013&pages=18-30&pmid=23085382&doi=10.1016/j.phrs.2012.10.006&)\]
40.  Goff JP, Epperly MW, Dixon T, Wang H, Franicola D, Shields D, et al. Radiobiologic effects of GS-nitroxide (JP4–039) on the hematopoietic syndrome. In Vivo (Brooklyn). 2011;25(3)315–23. \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3202418/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21576404/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=In%20Vivo%20\(Brooklyn\)&title=Radiobiologic%20effects%20of%20GS-nitroxide%20\(JP4%E2%80%93039\)%20on%20the%20hematopoietic%20syndrome&author=JP%20Goff&author=MW%20Epperly&author=T%20Dixon&author=H%20Wang&author=D%20Franicola&volume=25&issue=3&publication_year=2011&pages=315-23&pmid=21576404&)\]
41.  Gore E, 2004. Celecoxib and radiation therapy in non-small-cell lung cancer. Oncology (Williston Park) 18 (14 Suppl 14), 10–14. \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15685827/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Oncology%20\(Williston%20Park\)&title=Celecoxib%20and%20radiation%20therapy%20in%20non-small-cell%20lung%20cancer&author=E%20Gore&volume=18&issue=14%20Suppl%2014&publication_year=2004&pages=10-14&pmid=15685827&)\]
42.  Guan J, Wan XS, Zhou Z, Ware J, Donahue JJ, Biaglow JE, et al. , 2004. Effects of dietary supplements on space radiation-induced oxidative stress in Sprague-Dawley rats. Radiat. Res. 162 (5), 572–579. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1667/rr3249)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15624312/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Res&title=Effects%20of%20dietary%20supplements%20on%20space%20radiation-induced%20oxidative%20stress%20in%20Sprague-Dawley%20rats&author=J%20Guan&author=XS%20Wan&author=Z%20Zhou&author=J%20Ware&author=JJ%20Donahue&volume=162&issue=5&publication_year=2004&pages=572-579&pmid=15624312&doi=10.1667/rr3249&)\]
43.  Gupta R, Yin L, Grosche A, Lin S, Xu X, Guo J, et al. , 2020. An amino acid-based oral rehydration solution regulates radiation-induced intestinal barrier disruption in mice. J. Nutr. 150 (5), 1100–1108. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/jn/nxaa025)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32133527/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Nutr&title=An%20amino%20acid-based%20oral%20rehydration%20solution%20regulates%20radiation-induced%20intestinal%20barrier%20disruption%20in%20mice&author=R%20Gupta&author=L%20Yin&author=A%20Grosche&author=S%20Lin&author=X%20Xu&volume=150&issue=5&publication_year=2020&pages=1100-1108&pmid=32133527&doi=10.1093/jn/nxaa025&)\]
44.  Hahn SM, Tochner Z, Krishna CM, Glass J, Wilson L, Samuni A, et al. , 1992. Tempol, a stable free radical, is a novel murine radiation protector. Cancer Res. 52 (7), 1750–1753. \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1551104/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cancer%20Res&title=Tempol,%20a%20stable%20free%20radical,%20is%20a%20novel%20murine%20radiation%20protector&author=SM%20Hahn&author=Z%20Tochner&author=CM%20Krishna&author=J%20Glass&author=L%20Wilson&volume=52&issue=7&publication_year=1992&pages=1750-1753&pmid=1551104&)\]
45.  Hahn SM, Krishna CM, Samuni A, DeGraff W, Cuscela DO, Johnstone P, et al. , 1994. Potential use of nitroxides in radiation oncology. Cancer Res. 54 (7 Suppl), 2006s–2010s. \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8137329/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cancer%20Res&title=Potential%20use%20of%20nitroxides%20in%20radiation%20oncology&author=SM%20Hahn&author=CM%20Krishna&author=A%20Samuni&author=W%20DeGraff&author=DO%20Cuscela&volume=54&issue=7%20Suppl&publication_year=1994&pages=2006s-2010s&pmid=8137329&)\]
46.  Holden S, Perez R, Hall R, Fallgren CM, Ponnaiya B, Garty G, et al. , 2021. Effects of acute and chronic exposure to a mixed field of neutrons and photons and single or fractionated simulated galactic cosmic ray exposure on behavioral and cognitive performance in mice. Radiat. Res. 196 (1), 31–39. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1667/RADE-20-00228.1)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8297553/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33857301/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Res&title=Effects%20of%20acute%20and%20chronic%20exposure%20to%20a%20mixed%20field%20of%20neutrons%20and%20photons%20and%20single%20or%20fractionated%20simulated%20galactic%20cosmic%20ray%20exposure%20on%20behavioral%20and%20cognitive%20performance%20in%20mice&author=S%20Holden&author=R%20Perez&author=R%20Hall&author=CM%20Fallgren&author=B%20Ponnaiya&volume=196&issue=1&publication_year=2021&pages=31-39&pmid=33857301&doi=10.1667/RADE-20-00228.1&)\]
47.  Hoorelbeke D, Decrock E, De Smet M, De Bock M, Descamps B, Van Haver V, et al. , 2020. Cx43 channels and signaling via IP. Cell Death. Dis. 11 (3), 194. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41419-020-2392-5)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7080808/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32188841/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell%20Death.%20Dis&title=Cx43%20channels%20and%20signaling%20via%20IP&author=D%20Hoorelbeke&author=E%20Decrock&author=M%20De%20Smet&author=M%20De%20Bock&author=B%20Descamps&volume=11&issue=3&publication_year=2020&pages=194&pmid=32188841&doi=10.1038/s41419-020-2392-5&)\]
48.  Hunter NR, Valdecanas D, Liao Z, Milas L, Thames HD, Mason KA, 2013. Mitigation and treatment of radiation-induced thoracic injury with a cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor, celecoxib. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 85 (2), 472–476. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijrobp.2012.04.025)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22672748/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.%20J.%20Radiat.%20Oncol.%20Biol.%20Phys&title=Mitigation%20and%20treatment%20of%20radiation-induced%20thoracic%20injury%20with%20a%20cyclooxygenase-2%20inhibitor,%20celecoxib&author=NR%20Hunter&author=D%20Valdecanas&author=Z%20Liao&author=L%20Milas&author=HD%20Thames&volume=85&issue=2&publication_year=2013&pages=472-476&pmid=22672748&doi=10.1016/j.ijrobp.2012.04.025&)\]
49.  Jakubczyk K, Dec K, Kałduńska J, Kawczuga D, Kochman J, Janda K, 2020. Reactive oxygen species - sources, functions, oxidative damage. Pol. Merkur. Lekarski 48 (284), 124–127. \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32352946/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pol.%20Merkur.%20Lekarski&title=Reactive%20oxygen%20species%20-%20sources,%20functions,%20oxidative%20damage&author=K%20Jakubczyk&author=K%20Dec&author=J%20Ka%C5%82du%C5%84ska&author=D%20Kawczuga&author=J%20Kochman&volume=48&issue=284&publication_year=2020&pages=124-127&pmid=32352946&)\]
50.  Jelveh S, Kaspler P, Bhogal N, Mahmood J, Lindsay PE, Okunieff P, et al. , 2013. Investigations of antioxidant-mediated protection and mitigation of radiation-induced DNA damage and lipid peroxidation in murine skin. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 89 (8), 618–627. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3109/09553002.2013.782450)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23484491/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.%20J.%20Radiat.%20Biol&title=Investigations%20of%20antioxidant-mediated%20protection%20and%20mitigation%20of%20radiation-induced%20DNA%20damage%20and%20lipid%20peroxidation%20in%20murine%20skin&author=S%20Jelveh&author=P%20Kaspler&author=N%20Bhogal&author=J%20Mahmood&author=PE%20Lindsay&volume=89&issue=8&publication_year=2013&pages=618-627&pmid=23484491&doi=10.3109/09553002.2013.782450&)\]
51.  Jenrow KA, Brown SL, Liu J, Kolozsvary A, Lapanowski K, Kim JH, 2010. Ramipril mitigates radiation-induced impairment of neurogenesis in the rat dentate gyrus. Radiat. Oncol. 5, 6. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/1748-717X-5-6)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2825515/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20122169/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Oncol&title=Ramipril%20mitigates%20radiation-induced%20impairment%20of%20neurogenesis%20in%20the%20rat%20dentate%20gyrus&author=KA%20Jenrow&author=SL%20Brown&author=J%20Liu&author=A%20Kolozsvary&author=K%20Lapanowski&volume=5&publication_year=2010&pages=6&pmid=20122169&doi=10.1186/1748-717X-5-6&)\]
52.  Jenrow KA, Liu J, Brown SL, Kolozsvary A, Lapanowski K, Kim JH, 2011. Combined atorvastatin and ramipril mitigate radiation-induced impairment of dentate gyrus neurogenesis. J. Neurooncol. 101 (3), 449–456. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11060-010-0282-x)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20617366/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Neurooncol&title=Combined%20atorvastatin%20and%20ramipril%20mitigate%20radiation-induced%20impairment%20of%20dentate%20gyrus%20neurogenesis&author=KA%20Jenrow&author=J%20Liu&author=SL%20Brown&author=A%20Kolozsvary&author=K%20Lapanowski&volume=101&issue=3&publication_year=2011&pages=449-456&pmid=20617366&doi=10.1007/s11060-010-0282-x&)\]
53.  Kennedy AR, Guan J, Ware JH, 2007. Countermeasures against space radiation induced oxidative stress in mice. Radiat. Environ. Biophys. 46 (2), 201–203. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00411-007-0105-4)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17387501/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Environ.%20Biophys&title=Countermeasures%20against%20space%20radiation%20induced%20oxidative%20stress%20in%20mice&author=AR%20Kennedy&author=J%20Guan&author=JH%20Ware&volume=46&issue=2&publication_year=2007&pages=201-203&pmid=17387501&doi=10.1007/s00411-007-0105-4&)\]
54.  Kennedy AR, 2021. Proteases, protease inhibitors and radiation carcinogenesis. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 1–9. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1080/09553002.2021.1962567)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34325613/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.%20J.%20Radiat.%20Biol&title=Proteases,%20protease%20inhibitors%20and%20radiation%20carcinogenesis&author=AR%20Kennedy&publication_year=2021&pages=1-9&pmid=34325613&doi=10.1080/09553002.2021.1962567&)\]
55.  Kim K, Pollard JM, Norris AJ, McDonald JT, Sun Y, Micewicz E, et al. , 2009. High-throughput screening identifies two classes of antibiotics as radioprotectors tetracyclines and fluoroquinolones. Clin. Cancer Res. 15 (23), 7238–7245. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-1964)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2787903/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19920105/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin.%20Cancer%20Res&title=High-throughput%20screening%20identifies%20two%20classes%20of%20antibiotics%20as%20radioprotectors%20tetracyclines%20and%20fluoroquinolones&author=K%20Kim&author=JM%20Pollard&author=AJ%20Norris&author=JT%20McDonald&author=Y%20Sun&volume=15&issue=23&publication_year=2009&pages=7238-7245&pmid=19920105&doi=10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-1964&)\]
56.  Klement RJ, 2018. Fasting, fats, and physics combining ketogenic and radiation therapy against cancer. Complement. Med. Res. 25 (2), 102–113. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1159/000484045)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29130953/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Complement.%20Med.%20Res&title=Fasting,%20fats,%20and%20physics%20combining%20ketogenic%20and%20radiation%20therapy%20against%20cancer&author=RJ%20Klement&volume=25&issue=2&publication_year=2018&pages=102-113&pmid=29130953&doi=10.1159/000484045&)\]
57.  Kma L, Gao F, Fish BL, Moulder JE, Jacobs ER, Medhora M, 2012. Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors mitigate collagen synthesis induced by a single dose of radiation to the whole thorax. J. Radiat. Res. 53 (1), 10–17. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1269/jrr.11035)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3616750/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22302041/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Radiat.%20Res&title=Angiotensin%20converting%20enzyme%20inhibitors%20mitigate%20collagen%20synthesis%20induced%20by%20a%20single%20dose%20of%20radiation%20to%20the%20whole%20thorax&author=L%20Kma&author=F%20Gao&author=BL%20Fish&author=JE%20Moulder&author=ER%20Jacobs&volume=53&issue=1&publication_year=2012&pages=10-17&pmid=22302041&doi=10.1269/jrr.11035&)\]
58.  Kohl RR, Kolozsvary A, Brown SL, Zhu G, Kim JH, 2007. Differential radiation effect in tumor and normal tissue after treatment with ramipril, an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor. Radiat. Res. 168 (4), 440–445. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1667/RR0707.1)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17903031/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Res&title=Differential%20radiation%20effect%20in%20tumor%20and%20normal%20tissue%20after%20treatment%20with%20ramipril,%20an%20angiotensin-converting%20enzyme%20inhibitor&author=RR%20Kohl&author=A%20Kolozsvary&author=SL%20Brown&author=G%20Zhu&author=JH%20Kim&volume=168&issue=4&publication_year=2007&pages=440-445&pmid=17903031&doi=10.1667/RR0707.1&)\]
59.  Kumar A, Choudhary S, Kumar S, Adhikari JS, Kapoor S, Chaudhury NK, 2022. Role of melatonin mediated G-CSF induction in hematopoietic system of gamma-irradiated mice. Life Sci. 289, 120190. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lfs.2021.120190)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34883100/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Life%20Sci&title=Role%20of%20melatonin%20mediated%20G-CSF%20induction%20in%20hematopoietic%20system%20of%20gamma-irradiated%20mice&author=A%20Kumar&author=S%20Choudhary&author=S%20Kumar&author=JS%20Adhikari&author=S%20Kapoor&volume=289&publication_year=2022&pages=120190&pmid=34883100&doi=10.1016/j.lfs.2021.120190&)\]
60.  Land CE, Kwon D, Hoffman FO, Moroz B, Drozdovitch V, Bouville A, et al. , 2015. Accounting for shared and unshared dosimetric uncertainties in the dose response for ultrasound-detected thyroid nodules after exposure to radioactive fallout. Radiat. Res. 183 (2), 159–173. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1667/RR13794.1)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4423551/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25574587/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Res&title=Accounting%20for%20shared%20and%20unshared%20dosimetric%20uncertainties%20in%20the%20dose%20response%20for%20ultrasound-detected%20thyroid%20nodules%20after%20exposure%20to%20radioactive%20fallout&author=CE%20Land&author=D%20Kwon&author=FO%20Hoffman&author=B%20Moroz&author=V%20Drozdovitch&volume=183&issue=2&publication_year=2015&pages=159-173&pmid=25574587&doi=10.1667/RR13794.1&)\]
61.  Landauer MR, Harvey AJ, Kaytor MD, Day RM, 2019. Mechanism and therapeutic window of a genistein nanosuspension to protect against hematopoietic-acute radiation syndrome. J. Radiat. Res. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/jrr/rrz014)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6530628/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31038675/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Radiat.%20Res&title=Mechanism%20and%20therapeutic%20window%20of%20a%20genistein%20nanosuspension%20to%20protect%20against%20hematopoietic-acute%20radiation%20syndrome&author=MR%20Landauer&author=AJ%20Harvey&author=MD%20Kaytor&author=RM%20Day&publication_year=2019&pmid=31038675&doi=10.1093/jrr/rrz014&)\]
62.  Lee JC, Krochak R, Blouin A, Kanterakis S, Chatterjee S, Arguiri E, et al. , 2009. Dietary flaxseed prevents radiation-induced oxidative lung damage, inflammation and fibrosis in a mouse model of thoracic radiation injury. Cancer Biol. Ther. 8 (1), 47–53. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.4161/cbt.8.1.7092)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2745149/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18981722/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cancer%20Biol.%20Ther&title=Dietary%20flaxseed%20prevents%20radiation-induced%20oxidative%20lung%20damage,%20inflammation%20and%20fibrosis%20in%20a%20mouse%20model%20of%20thoracic%20radiation%20injury&author=JC%20Lee&author=R%20Krochak&author=A%20Blouin&author=S%20Kanterakis&author=S%20Chatterjee&volume=8&issue=1&publication_year=2009&pages=47-53&pmid=18981722&doi=10.4161/cbt.8.1.7092&)\]
63.  Little MP, Azizova TV, Bazyka D, Bouffler SD, Cardis E, Chekin S, et al. , 2012. Systematic review and meta-analysis of circulatory disease from exposure to low-level ionizing radiation and estimates of potential population mortality risks. Environ. Health Perspect. 120 (11), 1503–1511. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1204982)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3556625/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22728254/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Environ.%20Health%20Perspect&title=Systematic%20review%20and%20meta-analysis%20of%20circulatory%20disease%20from%20exposure%20to%20low-level%20ionizing%20radiation%20and%20estimates%20of%20potential%20population%20mortality%20risks&author=MP%20Little&author=TV%20Azizova&author=D%20Bazyka&author=SD%20Bouffler&author=E%20Cardis&volume=120&issue=11&publication_year=2012&pages=1503-1511&pmid=22728254&doi=10.1289/ehp.1204982&)\]
64.  Little JB, 2003. Cellular and tissue effects of radiation. editors. In: Kufe DW, Pollock RE, Weichselbaum RR (Eds.), Holland-Frei Cancer Medicine, 6th Edition. BC Decker, Hamilton, Ontario. \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Holland-Frei%20Cancer%20Medicine&author=JB%20Little&author=DW%20Kufe&author=RE%20Pollock&author=RR%20Weichselbaum&publication_year=2003&)\]
65.  MacVittie TJ, Gibbs A, Farese AM, Barrow K, Bennett A, Taylor-Howell C, et al. , 2017. AEOL 10150 mitigates radiation-induced lung injury in the nonhuman primate morbidity and mortality are administration schedule-dependent. Radiat. Res. 187 (3), 298–318. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1667/RR4413.1)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5488289/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28208025/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Res&title=AEOL%2010150%20mitigates%20radiation-induced%20lung%20injury%20in%20the%20nonhuman%20primate%20morbidity%20and%20mortality%20are%20administration%20schedule-dependent&author=TJ%20MacVittie&author=A%20Gibbs&author=AM%20Farese&author=K%20Barrow&author=A%20Bennett&volume=187&issue=3&publication_year=2017&pages=298-318&pmid=28208025&doi=10.1667/RR4413.1&)\]
66.  McLaughlin MF, Donoviel DB, Jones JA, 2017. Novel indications for commonly used medications as radiation protectants in spaceflight. Aerosp. Med. Hum. Perform. 88 (7), 665–676. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3357/AMHP.4735.2017)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5937128/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28641684/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Aerosp.%20Med.%20Hum.%20Perform&title=Novel%20indications%20for%20commonly%20used%20medications%20as%20radiation%20protectants%20in%20spaceflight&author=MF%20McLaughlin&author=DB%20Donoviel&author=JA%20Jones&volume=88&issue=7&publication_year=2017&pages=665-676&pmid=28641684&doi=10.3357/AMHP.4735.2017&)\]
67.  Medhora M, Gao F, Fish BL, Jacobs ER, Moulder JE, Szabo A, 2012. Dose-modifying factor for captopril for mitigation of radiation injury to normal lung. J. Radiat. Res. 53 (4), 633–640. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/jrr/rrs004)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3393339/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22843631/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Radiat.%20Res&title=Dose-modifying%20factor%20for%20captopril%20for%20mitigation%20of%20radiation%20injury%20to%20normal%20lung&author=M%20Medhora&author=F%20Gao&author=BL%20Fish&author=ER%20Jacobs&author=JE%20Moulder&volume=53&issue=4&publication_year=2012&pages=633-640&pmid=22843631&doi=10.1093/jrr/rrs004&)\]
68.  Mehrotra S, Pecaut MJ, Gridley DS Effects of minocycline on hematopoietic recovery after whole-body irradiation. In Vivo (Brooklyn). 2013;27(1)11–28. \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23239848/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=In%20Vivo%20\(Brooklyn\)&title=Effects%20of%20minocycline%20on%20hematopoietic%20recovery%20after%20whole-body%20irradiation&author=S%20Mehrotra&author=MJ%20Pecaut&author=DS%20Gridley&volume=27&issue=1&publication_year=2013&pages=11-28&pmid=23239848&)\]
69.  Milanlioglu A, Torlak PT, 2011. Intracranial hypertension and ciprofloxacin. Neurol. India 59 (2), 302–303. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.4103/0028-3886.79158)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21483143/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Neurol.%20India&title=Intracranial%20hypertension%20and%20ciprofloxacin&author=A%20Milanlioglu&author=PT%20Torlak&volume=59&issue=2&publication_year=2011&pages=302-303&pmid=21483143&doi=10.4103/0028-3886.79158&)\]
70.  Mishra OP, Pietrofesa R, Christofidou-Solomidou M, 2014. Novel synthetic (S,S) and (R,R)-secoisolariciresinol diglucosides (SDGs) protect naked plasmid and genomic DNA From gamma radiation damage. Radiat. Res. 182 (1), 102–110. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1667/RR13635.1)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4130221/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24945894/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Res&title=Novel%20synthetic%20\(S,S\)%20and%20\(R,R\)-secoisolariciresinol%20diglucosides%20\(SDGs\)%20protect%20naked%20plasmid%20and%20genomic%20DNA%20From%20gamma%20radiation%20damage&author=OP%20Mishra&author=R%20Pietrofesa&author=M%20Christofidou-Solomidou&volume=182&issue=1&publication_year=2014&pages=102-110&pmid=24945894&doi=10.1667/RR13635.1&)\]
71.  Mitchell JB, Anver MR, Sowers AL, Rosenberg PS, Figueroa M, Thetford A, et al. , 2012. The antioxidant tempol reduces carcinogenesis and enhances survival in mice when administered after nonlethal total body radiation. Cancer Res. 72 (18), 4846–4855. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-1879)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3445749/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22805306/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cancer%20Res&title=The%20antioxidant%20tempol%20reduces%20carcinogenesis%20and%20enhances%20survival%20in%20mice%20when%20administered%20after%20nonlethal%20total%20body%20radiation&author=JB%20Mitchell&author=MR%20Anver&author=AL%20Sowers&author=PS%20Rosenberg&author=M%20Figueroa&volume=72&issue=18&publication_year=2012&pages=4846-4855&pmid=22805306&doi=10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-1879&)\]
72.  Mitrugno A, Sylman JL, Ngo AT, Pang J, Sears RC, Williams CD, et al. , 2017. Aspirin therapy reduces the ability of platelets to promote colon and pancreatic cancer cell proliferation implications for the oncoprotein c-MYC. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 312 (2), C176–CC89. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.00196.2016)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5336594/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27903583/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am.%20J.%20Physiol.%20Cell%20Physiol&title=Aspirin%20therapy%20reduces%20the%20ability%20of%20platelets%20to%20promote%20colon%20and%20pancreatic%20cancer%20cell%20proliferation%20implications%20for%20the%20oncoprotein%20c-MYC&author=A%20Mitrugno&author=JL%20Sylman&author=AT%20Ngo&author=J%20Pang&author=RC%20Sears&volume=312&issue=2&publication_year=2017&pages=C176-CC89&pmid=27903583&doi=10.1152/ajpcell.00196.2016&)\]
73.  Moulder JE, Cohen EP, Fish BL, 2011. Captopril and losartan for mitigation of renal injury caused by single-dose total-body irradiation. Radiat. Res. 175 (1), 29–36. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1667/RR2400.1)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3080022/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21175344/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Res&title=Captopril%20and%20losartan%20for%20mitigation%20of%20renal%20injury%20caused%20by%20single-dose%20total-body%20irradiation&author=JE%20Moulder&author=EP%20Cohen&author=BL%20Fish&volume=175&issue=1&publication_year=2011&pages=29-36&pmid=21175344&doi=10.1667/RR2400.1&)\]
74.  Moulder JE, Cohen EP, Fish BL, 2014. Mitigation of experimental radiation nephropathy by renin-equivalent doses of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 90 (9), 762–768. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3109/09553002.2014.938375)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4402090/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24991882/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.%20J.%20Radiat.%20Biol&title=Mitigation%20of%20experimental%20radiation%20nephropathy%20by%20renin-equivalent%20doses%20of%20angiotensin%20converting%20enzyme%20inhibitors&author=JE%20Moulder&author=EP%20Cohen&author=BL%20Fish&volume=90&issue=9&publication_year=2014&pages=762-768&pmid=24991882&doi=10.3109/09553002.2014.938375&)\]
75.  Murigi FN, Mohindra P, Hung C, Salimi S, Goetz W, Pavlovic R, et al. , 2015. Dose optimization study of AEOL 10150 as a mitigator of radiation-induced lung injury in CBA/J mice. Radiat. Res. 184 (4), 422–432. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1667/RR14110.1)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4615610/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26414508/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Res&title=Dose%20optimization%20study%20of%20AEOL%2010150%20as%20a%20mitigator%20of%20radiation-induced%20lung%20injury%20in%20CBA/J%20mice&author=FN%20Murigi&author=P%20Mohindra&author=C%20Hung&author=S%20Salimi&author=W%20Goetz&volume=184&issue=4&publication_year=2015&pages=422-432&pmid=26414508&doi=10.1667/RR14110.1&)\]
76.  National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 2016. Evidence Report Risk of Acute Radiation Syndromes Due to Solar Particle Events. Human Research Program Space Radiation Program Element. NASA, Houston, TX: editor. \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Evidence%20Report%20Risk%20of%20Acute%20Radiation%20Syndromes%20Due%20to%20Solar%20Particle%20Events.%20Human%20Research%20Program%20Space%20Radiation%20Program%20Element&publication_year=2016&)\]
77.  Ozasa K, Shimizu Y, Suyama A, Kasagi F, Soda M, Grant EJ, et al. , 2012. Studies of the mortality of atomic bomb survivors, report 14, 1950–2003 an overview of cancer and noncancer diseases. Radiat. Res. 177 (3), 229–243. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1667/rr2629.1)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22171960/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Res&title=Studies%20of%20the%20mortality%20of%20atomic%20bomb%20survivors,%20report%2014,%201950%E2%80%932003%20an%20overview%20of%20cancer%20and%20noncancer%20diseases&author=K%20Ozasa&author=Y%20Shimizu&author=A%20Suyama&author=F%20Kasagi&author=M%20Soda&volume=177&issue=3&publication_year=2012&pages=229-243&pmid=22171960&doi=10.1667/rr2629.1&)\]
78.  Patrignani P, Patrono C, 2016. Aspirin and cancer. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 68 (9), 967–976. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2016.05.083)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27561771/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Am.%20Coll.%20Cardiol&title=Aspirin%20and%20cancer&author=P%20Patrignani&author=C%20Patrono&volume=68&issue=9&publication_year=2016&pages=967-976&pmid=27561771&doi=10.1016/j.jacc.2016.05.083&)\]
79.  Poulose SM, Rabin BM, Bielinski DF, Kelly ME, Miller MG, Thanthaeng N, et al. , 2017. Neurochemical differences in learning and memory paradigms among rats supplemented with anthocyanin-rich blueberry diets and exposed to acute doses of. Life Sci. Space Res. (Amst) 12, 16–23. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lssr.2016.12.002)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28212704/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Life%20Sci.%20Space%20Res.%20\(Amst\)&title=Neurochemical%20differences%20in%20learning%20and%20memory%20paradigms%20among%20rats%20supplemented%20with%20anthocyanin-rich%20blueberry%20diets%20and%20exposed%20to%20acute%20doses%20of&author=SM%20Poulose&author=BM%20Rabin&author=DF%20Bielinski&author=ME%20Kelly&author=MG%20Miller&volume=12&publication_year=2017&pages=16-23&pmid=28212704&doi=10.1016/j.lssr.2016.12.002&)\]
80.  Prasanna PG, Stone HB, Wong RS, Capala J, Bernhard EJ, Vikram B, et al. , 2012. Normal tissue protection for improving radiotherapy where are the gaps. Transl. Cancer Res. 1 (1), 35–48. \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3411185/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22866245/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Transl.%20Cancer%20Res&title=Normal%20tissue%20protection%20for%20improving%20radiotherapy%20where%20are%20the%20gaps&author=PG%20Prasanna&author=HB%20Stone&author=RS%20Wong&author=J%20Capala&author=EJ%20Bernhard&volume=1&issue=1&publication_year=2012&pages=35-48&pmid=22866245&)\]
81.  Prasanna PG, Ahmed MM, Stone HB, Vikram B, Mehta MP, Coleman CN, 2014. Radiation-induced brain damage, impact of Michael Robbins\\’ work and the need for predictive biomarkers. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 90 (9), 742–752. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3109/09553002.2014.925607)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24844376/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.%20J.%20Radiat.%20Biol&title=Radiation-induced%20brain%20damage,%20impact%20of%20Michael%20Robbins%5C%E2%80%99%20work%20and%20the%20need%20for%20predictive%20biomarkers&author=PG%20Prasanna&author=MM%20Ahmed&author=HB%20Stone&author=B%20Vikram&author=MP%20Mehta&volume=90&issue=9&publication_year=2014&pages=742-752&pmid=24844376&doi=10.3109/09553002.2014.925607&)\]
82.  Prasanna PG, Narayanan D, Hallett K, Bernhard EJ, Ahmed MM, Evans G, et al. , 2015. Radioprotectors and radiomitigators for improving radiation therapy the Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) gateway for accelerating clinical translation. Radiat. Res. 184 (3), 235–248. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1667/RR14186.1)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4581592/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26284423/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Res&title=Radioprotectors%20and%20radiomitigators%20for%20improving%20radiation%20therapy%20the%20Small%20Business%20Innovation%20Research%20\(SBIR\)%20gateway%20for%20accelerating%20clinical%20translation&author=PG%20Prasanna&author=D%20Narayanan&author=K%20Hallett&author=EJ%20Bernhard&author=MM%20Ahmed&volume=184&issue=3&publication_year=2015&pages=235-248&pmid=26284423&doi=10.1667/RR14186.1&)\]
83.  Prasanna PGS, Narayanan D, Zhang K, Rahbar A, Coleman CN, Vikram B, 2020. Radiation biomarkers can small businesses drive accurate radiation precision medicine. Radiat. Res. 193 (3), 199–208. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1667/RR15553.1)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31910120/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Res&title=Radiation%20biomarkers%20can%20small%20businesses%20drive%20accurate%20radiation%20precision%20medicine&author=PGS%20Prasanna&author=D%20Narayanan&author=K%20Zhang&author=A%20Rahbar&author=CN%20Coleman&volume=193&issue=3&publication_year=2020&pages=199-208&pmid=31910120&doi=10.1667/RR15553.1&)\]
84.  Prasanna PG, Citrin DE, Hildesheim J, Ahmed MM, Venkatachalam S, Riscuta G, et al. , 2021. Therapy-induced senescence opportunities to improve anticancer therapy. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 113 (10), 1285–1298. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djab064)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8486333/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33792717/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Natl.%20Cancer%20Inst&title=Therapy-induced%20senescence%20opportunities%20to%20improve%20anticancer%20therapy&author=PG%20Prasanna&author=DE%20Citrin&author=J%20Hildesheim&author=MM%20Ahmed&author=S%20Venkatachalam&volume=113&issue=10&publication_year=2021&pages=1285-1298&pmid=33792717&doi=10.1093/jnci/djab064&)\]
85.  Qiao Y, Yang T, Gan Y, Li W, Wang C, Gong Y, et al. , 2018. Associations between aspirin use and the risk of cancers a meta-analysis of observational studies. BMC Cancer 18 (1), 288. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12885-018-4156-5)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5851082/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29534696/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=BMC%20Cancer&title=Associations%20between%20aspirin%20use%20and%20the%20risk%20of%20cancers%20a%20meta-analysis%20of%20observational%20studies&author=Y%20Qiao&author=T%20Yang&author=Y%20Gan&author=W%20Li&author=C%20Wang&volume=18&issue=1&publication_year=2018&pages=288&pmid=29534696&doi=10.1186/s12885-018-4156-5&)\]
86.  Riley PA, 1994. Free radicals in biology oxidative stress and the effects of ionizing radiation. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 65 (1), 27–33. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1080/09553009414550041)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7905906/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.%20J.%20Radiat.%20Biol&title=Free%20radicals%20in%20biology%20oxidative%20stress%20and%20the%20effects%20of%20ionizing%20radiation&author=PA%20Riley&volume=65&issue=1&publication_year=1994&pages=27-33&pmid=7905906&doi=10.1080/09553009414550041&)\]
87.  Robb MA, McInnes PM, Califf RM, 2016. Biomarkers and surrogate endpoints developing common terminology and definitions. JAMA 315 (11), 1107–1108. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2016.2240)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26978201/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=JAMA&title=Biomarkers%20and%20surrogate%20endpoints%20developing%20common%20terminology%20and%20definitions&author=MA%20Robb&author=PM%20McInnes&author=RM%20Califf&volume=315&issue=11&publication_year=2016&pages=1107-1108&pmid=26978201&doi=10.1001/jama.2016.2240&)\]
88.  Rotolo J, Stancevic B, Zhang J, Hua G, Fuller J, Yin X, et al. , 2012. Anti-ceramide antibody prevents the radiation gastrointestinal syndrome in mice. J. Clin. Invest. 122 (5), 1786–1790. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI59920)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3336980/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22466649/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Clin.%20Invest&title=Anti-ceramide%20antibody%20prevents%20the%20radiation%20gastrointestinal%20syndrome%20in%20mice&author=J%20Rotolo&author=B%20Stancevic&author=J%20Zhang&author=G%20Hua&author=J%20Fuller&volume=122&issue=5&publication_year=2012&pages=1786-1790&pmid=22466649&doi=10.1172/JCI59920&)\]
89.  Roy AL, Sierra F, Howcroft K, Singer DS, Sharpless N, Hodes RJ, et al. , 2020. A blueprint for characterizing senescence. Cell 183 (5), 1143–1146. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.10.032)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8364378/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33128870/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell&title=A%20blueprint%20for%20characterizing%20senescence&author=AL%20Roy&author=F%20Sierra&author=K%20Howcroft&author=DS%20Singer&author=N%20Sharpless&volume=183&issue=5&publication_year=2020&pages=1143-1146&pmid=33128870&doi=10.1016/j.cell.2020.10.032&)\]
90.  Sahakitrungruang C, Thum-Umnuaysuk S, Patiwongpaisarn A, Atittharnsakul P, Rojanasakul A, 2011. A novel treatment for haemorrhagic radiation proctitis using colonic irrigation and oral antibiotic administration. Colorectal Dis. 13 (5), e79–e82. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1463-1318.2010.02527.x)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21114751/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Colorectal%20Dis&title=A%20novel%20treatment%20for%20haemorrhagic%20radiation%20proctitis%20using%20colonic%20irrigation%20and%20oral%20antibiotic%20administration&author=C%20Sahakitrungruang&author=S%20Thum-Umnuaysuk&author=A%20Patiwongpaisarn&author=P%20Atittharnsakul&author=A%20Rojanasakul&volume=13&issue=5&publication_year=2011&pages=e79-e82&pmid=21114751&doi=10.1111/j.1463-1318.2010.02527.x&)\]
91.  Schreurs AS, Shirazi-Fard Y, Shahnazari M, Alwood JS, Truong TA, Tahimic CG, et al. , 2016. Dried plum diet protects from bone loss caused by ionizing radiation. Sci. Rep. 6, 21343. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/srep21343)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4750446/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26867002/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Sci.%20Rep&title=Dried%20plum%20diet%20protects%20from%20bone%20loss%20caused%20by%20ionizing%20radiation&author=AS%20Schreurs&author=Y%20Shirazi-Fard&author=M%20Shahnazari&author=JS%20Alwood&author=TA%20Truong&volume=6&publication_year=2016&pages=21343&pmid=26867002&doi=10.1038/srep21343&)\]
92.  Shaghagi Z, Alvandi M, Nosrati S, Hadei SK, 2021. Potential utility of peptides against damage induced by ionizing radiation. Futur. Oncol. 17 (10), 1219–1235. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.2217/fon-2020-0577)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33593084/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Futur.%20Oncol&title=Potential%20utility%20of%20peptides%20against%20damage%20induced%20by%20ionizing%20radiation&author=Z%20Shaghagi&author=M%20Alvandi&author=S%20Nosrati&author=SK%20Hadei&volume=17&issue=10&publication_year=2021&pages=1219-1235&pmid=33593084&doi=10.2217/fon-2020-0577&)\]
93.  Shainer R, Almogi-Hazan O, Berger A, Hinden L, Mueller M, Brodie C, et al. , 2016. PreImplantation factor (PIF) therapy provides comprehensive protection against radiation induced pathologies. Oncotarget 7 (37), 58975–58994. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.18632/oncotarget.10635)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5312289/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27449294/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Oncotarget&title=PreImplantation%20factor%20\(PIF\)%20therapy%20provides%20comprehensive%20protection%20against%20radiation%20induced%20pathologies&author=R%20Shainer&author=O%20Almogi-Hazan&author=A%20Berger&author=L%20Hinden&author=M%20Mueller&volume=7&issue=37&publication_year=2016&pages=58975-58994&pmid=27449294&doi=10.18632/oncotarget.10635&)\]
94.  Shao L, Feng W, Li H, Gardner D, Luo Y, Wang Y, et al. , 2014. Total body irradiation causes long-term mouse BM injury via induction of HSC premature senescence in an Ink4a- and Arf-independent manner. Blood 123 (20), 3105–3115. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2013-07-515619)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4023419/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24622326/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Blood&title=Total%20body%20irradiation%20causes%20long-term%20mouse%20BM%20injury%20via%20induction%20of%20HSC%20premature%20senescence%20in%20an%20Ink4a-%20and%20Arf-independent%20manner&author=L%20Shao&author=W%20Feng&author=H%20Li&author=D%20Gardner&author=Y%20Luo&volume=123&issue=20&publication_year=2014&pages=3105-3115&pmid=24622326&doi=10.1182/blood-2013-07-515619&)\]
95.  Sidorenkov G, Navis G, 2014. Safety of ACE inhibitor therapies in patients with chronic kidney disease. Expert Opin. Drug Saf. 13 (10), 1383–1395. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1517/14740338.2014.951328)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25148900/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Expert%20Opin.%20Drug%20Saf&title=Safety%20of%20ACE%20inhibitor%20therapies%20in%20patients%20with%20chronic%20kidney%20disease&author=G%20Sidorenkov&author=G%20Navis&volume=13&issue=10&publication_year=2014&pages=1383-1395&pmid=25148900&doi=10.1517/14740338.2014.951328&)\]
96.  Sihver L, Mortazavi SMJ, 2021. Biological protection in deep space missions. J. Biomed. Phys. Eng. 11 (6), 663–674. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.31661/jbpe.v0i0.1193)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8649166/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34904063/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Biomed.%20Phys.%20Eng&title=Biological%20protection%20in%20deep%20space%20missions&author=L%20Sihver&author=SMJ%20Mortazavi&volume=11&issue=6&publication_year=2021&pages=663-674&pmid=34904063&doi=10.31661/jbpe.v0i0.1193&)\]
97.  Simon SL, Bouville A, Beck HL, Anspaugh LR, Thiessen KM, Hoffman FO, et al. , 2022. Dose estimation for exposure to radioactive fallout from nuclear detonations. Health Phys. 122 (1), 1–20. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/HP.0000000000001501)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8677604/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34898514/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Health%20Phys&title=Dose%20estimation%20for%20exposure%20to%20radioactive%20fallout%20from%20nuclear%20detonations&author=SL%20Simon&author=A%20Bouville&author=HL%20Beck&author=LR%20Anspaugh&author=KM%20Thiessen&volume=122&issue=1&publication_year=2022&pages=1-20&pmid=34898514&doi=10.1097/HP.0000000000001501&)\]
98.  Simone NL, Soule BP, Ly D, Saleh AD, Savage JE, Degraff W, et al. , 2009. Ionizing radiation-induced oxidative stress alters miRNA expression. PLoS One 4 (7), e6377. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0006377)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2712071/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19633716/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20One&title=Ionizing%20radiation-induced%20oxidative%20stress%20alters%20miRNA%20expression&author=NL%20Simone&author=BP%20Soule&author=D%20Ly&author=AD%20Saleh&author=JE%20Savage&volume=4&issue=7&publication_year=2009&pages=e6377&pmid=19633716&doi=10.1371/journal.pone.0006377&)\]
99.  Simonsen LC, Slaba TC, Guida P, Rusek A, 2020. NASA\\’s first ground-based galactic cosmic ray simulator enabling a new era in space radiobiology research. PLoS Biol. 18 (5), e3000669. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3000669)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7236977/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32428004/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20Biol&title=NASA%5C%E2%80%99s%20first%20ground-based%20galactic%20cosmic%20ray%20simulator%20enabling%20a%20new%20era%20in%20space%20radiobiology%20research&author=LC%20Simonsen&author=TC%20Slaba&author=P%20Guida&author=A%20Rusek&volume=18&issue=5&publication_year=2020&pages=e3000669&pmid=32428004&doi=10.1371/journal.pbio.3000669&)\]
100.  Singh VK, Seed TM, 2020. BIO 300 a promising radiation countermeasure under advanced development for acute radiation syndrome and the delayed effects of acute radiation exposure. Expert Opin. Investig. Drugs 29 (5), 429–441. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1080/13543784.2020.1757648)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32450051/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Expert%20Opin.%20Investig.%20Drugs&title=BIO%20300%20a%20promising%20radiation%20countermeasure%20under%20advanced%20development%20for%20acute%20radiation%20syndrome%20and%20the%20delayed%20effects%20of%20acute%20radiation%20exposure&author=VK%20Singh&author=TM%20Seed&volume=29&issue=5&publication_year=2020&pages=429-441&pmid=32450051&doi=10.1080/13543784.2020.1757648&)\]
101.  Singh VK, Beattie LA, Seed TM, 2013. Vitamin E tocopherols and tocotrienols as potential radiation countermeasures. J. Radiat. Res. 54 (6), 973–988. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/jrr/rrt048)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3823775/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23658414/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Radiat.%20Res&title=Vitamin%20E%20tocopherols%20and%20tocotrienols%20as%20potential%20radiation%20countermeasures&author=VK%20Singh&author=LA%20Beattie&author=TM%20Seed&volume=54&issue=6&publication_year=2013&pages=973-988&pmid=23658414&doi=10.1093/jrr/rrt048&)\]
102.  Singh GK, Yadav V, Singh P, Bhowmik KT, 2017. Radiation-induced malignancies making radiotherapy a “two-edged sword” a review of literature. World J. Oncol. 8 (1), 1–6. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.14740/wjon996w)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5624654/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28983377/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=World%20J.%20Oncol&title=Radiation-induced%20malignancies%20making%20radiotherapy%20a%20%E2%80%9Ctwo-edged%20sword%E2%80%9D%20a%20review%20of%20literature&author=GK%20Singh&author=V%20Yadav&author=P%20Singh&author=KT%20Bhowmik&volume=8&issue=1&publication_year=2017&pages=1-6&pmid=28983377&doi=10.14740/wjon996w&)\]
103.  Sonis ST, 2001. AEOL 10150, a catalytic antioxidant, reduced the incidence and duration of radiation-induced oral mucositis in a hamster. Eur. J. Cancer 37, S361. \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur.%20J.%20Cancer&title=AEOL%2010150,%20a%20catalytic%20antioxidant,%20reduced%20the%20incidence%20and%20duration%20of%20radiation-induced%20oral%20mucositis%20in%20a%20hamster&author=ST%20Sonis&volume=37&publication_year=2001&pages=S361&)\]
104.  Spetz J, Moslehi J, Sarosiek K, 2018. Radiation-induced cardiovascular toxicity mechanisms, prevention, and treatment. Curr. Treat Options Cardiovasc. Med. 20 (4), 31. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11936-018-0627-x)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7325164/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29556748/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr.%20Treat%20Options%20Cardiovasc.%20Med&title=Radiation-induced%20cardiovascular%20toxicity%20mechanisms,%20prevention,%20and%20treatment&author=J%20Spetz&author=J%20Moslehi&author=K%20Sarosiek&volume=20&issue=4&publication_year=2018&pages=31&pmid=29556748&doi=10.1007/s11936-018-0627-x&)\]
105.  Stavitzski NM, Landon CS, Hinojo CM, Poff AM, Rogers CQ, D\\’Agostino DP, et al. , 2021. Exogenous ketone ester delays CNS oxygen toxicity without impairing cognitive and motor performance in male Sprague-Dawley rats. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 321 (2), R100–RR11. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpregu.00088.2021)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34132115/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am.%20J.%20Physiol.%20Regul.%20Integr.%20Comp.%20Physiol&title=Exogenous%20ketone%20ester%20delays%20CNS%20oxygen%20toxicity%20without%20impairing%20cognitive%20and%20motor%20performance%20in%20male%20Sprague-Dawley%20rats&author=NM%20Stavitzski&author=CS%20Landon&author=CM%20Hinojo&author=AM%20Poff&author=CQ%20Rogers&volume=321&issue=2&publication_year=2021&pages=R100-RR11&pmid=34132115&doi=10.1152/ajpregu.00088.2021&)\]
106.  Suman S, Kumar S, Moon BH, Angdisen J, Kallakury BVS, Datta K, et al. , 2021. Effects of dietary aspirin on high-LET radiation-induced prostaglandin E2 levels and gastrointestinal tumorigenesis in Apc. Life Sci. Space Res. (Amst) 31, 85–91. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lssr.2021.09.001)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9808916/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34689954/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Life%20Sci.%20Space%20Res.%20\(Amst\)&title=Effects%20of%20dietary%20aspirin%20on%20high-LET%20radiation-induced%20prostaglandin%20E2%20levels%20and%20gastrointestinal%20tumorigenesis%20in%20Apc&author=S%20Suman&author=S%20Kumar&author=BH%20Moon&author=J%20Angdisen&author=BVS%20Kallakury&volume=31&publication_year=2021&pages=85-91&pmid=34689954&doi=10.1016/j.lssr.2021.09.001&)\]
107.  Turowski JB, Pietrofesa RA, Lawson JA, Christofidou-Solomidou M, Hadjiliadis D, 2015. Flaxseed modulates inflammatory and oxidative stress biomarkers in cystic fibrosis a pilot study. BMC Complement. Altern. Med. 15, 148. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12906-015-0651-2)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4436808/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25963404/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=BMC%20Complement.%20Altern.%20Med&title=Flaxseed%20modulates%20inflammatory%20and%20oxidative%20stress%20biomarkers%20in%20cystic%20fibrosis%20a%20pilot%20study&author=JB%20Turowski&author=RA%20Pietrofesa&author=JA%20Lawson&author=M%20Christofidou-Solomidou&author=D%20Hadjiliadis&volume=15&publication_year=2015&pages=148&pmid=25963404&doi=10.1186/s12906-015-0651-2&)\]
108.  Varga Z, Sabzwari SRA, Vargova V, 2017. Cardiovascular risk of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs an under-recognized public health issue. Cureus 9 (4), e1144. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.1144)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5422108/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28491485/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cureus&title=Cardiovascular%20risk%20of%20nonsteroidal%20anti-inflammatory%20drugs%20an%20under-recognized%20public%20health%20issue&author=Z%20Varga&author=SRA%20Sabzwari&author=V%20Vargova&volume=9&issue=4&publication_year=2017&pages=e1144&pmid=28491485&doi=10.7759/cureus.1144&)\]
109.  Veech RL, Bradshaw PC, Clarke K, Curtis W, Pawlosky R, King MT, 2017. Ketone bodies mimic the life span extending properties of caloric restriction. IUBMB Life 69 (5), 305–314. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/iub.1627)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28371201/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=IUBMB%20Life&title=Ketone%20bodies%20mimic%20the%20life%20span%20extending%20properties%20of%20caloric%20restriction&author=RL%20Veech&author=PC%20Bradshaw&author=K%20Clarke&author=W%20Curtis&author=R%20Pawlosky&volume=69&issue=5&publication_year=2017&pages=305-314&pmid=28371201&doi=10.1002/iub.1627&)\]
110.  Velalopoulou A, Chatterjee S, Pietrofesa RA, Koziol-White C, Panettieri RA, Lin L, et al. , 2017. Synthetic secoisolariciresinol diglucoside (LGM2605) protects human lung in an ex vivo model of proton radiation damage. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 18 (12). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms18122525)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5751128/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29186841/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.%20J.%20Mol.%20Sci&title=Synthetic%20secoisolariciresinol%20diglucoside%20\(LGM2605\)%20protects%20human%20lung%20in%20an%20ex%20vivo%20model%20of%20proton%20radiation%20damage&author=A%20Velalopoulou&author=S%20Chatterjee&author=RA%20Pietrofesa&author=C%20Koziol-White&author=RA%20Panettieri&volume=18&issue=12&publication_year=2017&pmid=29186841&doi=10.3390/ijms18122525&)\]
111.  Ward WF, Kim YT, Molteni A, Solliday NH, 1988. Radiation-induced pulmonary endothelial dysfunction in rats modification by an inhibitor of angiotensin converting enzyme. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 15 (1), 135–140. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/0360-3016\(88\)90357-4)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/3292488/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.%20J.%20Radiat.%20Oncol.%20Biol.%20Phys&title=Radiation-induced%20pulmonary%20endothelial%20dysfunction%20in%20rats%20modification%20by%20an%20inhibitor%20of%20angiotensin%20converting%20enzyme&author=WF%20Ward&author=YT%20Kim&author=A%20Molteni&author=NH%20Solliday&volume=15&issue=1&publication_year=1988&pages=135-140&pmid=3292488&doi=10.1016/0360-3016\(88\)90357-4&)\]
112.  Wedlake LJ, Silia F, Benton B, Lalji A, Thomas K, Dearnaley DP, et al. , 2012. Evaluating the efficacy of statins and ACE-inhibitors in reducing gastrointestinal toxicity in patients receiving radiotherapy for pelvic malignancies. Eur. J. Cancer 48 (14), 2117–2124. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejca.2011.12.034)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22386574/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur.%20J.%20Cancer&title=Evaluating%20the%20efficacy%20of%20statins%20and%20ACE-inhibitors%20in%20reducing%20gastrointestinal%20toxicity%20in%20patients%20receiving%20radiotherapy%20for%20pelvic%20malignancies&author=LJ%20Wedlake&author=F%20Silia&author=B%20Benton&author=A%20Lalji&author=K%20Thomas&volume=48&issue=14&publication_year=2012&pages=2117-2124&pmid=22386574&doi=10.1016/j.ejca.2011.12.034&)\]
113.  Williams JP, Hernady E, Johnston CJ, Reed CM, Fenton B, Okunieff P, et al. , 2004. Effect of administration of lovastatin on the development of late pulmonary effects after whole-lung irradiation in a murine model. Radiat. Res. 161 (5), 560–567. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1667/rr3168)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15161367/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Res&title=Effect%20of%20administration%20of%20lovastatin%20on%20the%20development%20of%20late%20pulmonary%20effects%20after%20whole-lung%20irradiation%20in%20a%20murine%20model&author=JP%20Williams&author=E%20Hernady&author=CJ%20Johnston&author=CM%20Reed&author=B%20Fenton&volume=161&issue=5&publication_year=2004&pages=560-567&pmid=15161367&doi=10.1667/rr3168&)\]
114.  Xin Y, Zhang HB, Tang TY, Liu GH, Wang JS, Jiang G, et al. , 2014. Low-dose radiation-induced apoptosis in human leukemia K562 cells through mitochondrial pathways. Mol. Med. Rep. 10 (3), 1569–1575. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3892/mmr.2014.2381)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25060925/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol.%20Med.%20Rep&title=Low-dose%20radiation-induced%20apoptosis%20in%20human%20leukemia%20K562%20cells%20through%20mitochondrial%20pathways&author=Y%20Xin&author=HB%20Zhang&author=TY%20Tang&author=GH%20Liu&author=JS%20Wang&volume=10&issue=3&publication_year=2014&pages=1569-1575&pmid=25060925&doi=10.3892/mmr.2014.2381&)\]
115.  Xu L, Yang X, Chen J, Ge X, Qin Q, Zhu H, et al. , 2016. Simvastatin attenuates radiation-induced salivary gland dysfunction in mice. Drug Des. Devel. Ther. 10, 2271–2278. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.2147/DDDT.S105809)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4948692/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27471375/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Drug%20Des.%20Devel.%20Ther&title=Simvastatin%20attenuates%20radiation-induced%20salivary%20gland%20dysfunction%20in%20mice&author=L%20Xu&author=X%20Yang&author=J%20Chen&author=X%20Ge&author=Q%20Qin&volume=10&publication_year=2016&pages=2271-2278&pmid=27471375&doi=10.2147/DDDT.S105809&)\]
116.  Yin L, Vijaygopal P, Menon R, Vaught LA, Zhang M, Zhang L, et al. , 2014. An amino acid mixture mitigates radiation-induced gastrointestinal toxicity. Health Phys. 106 (6), 734–744. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/HP.0000000000000117)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24776907/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Health%20Phys&title=An%20amino%20acid%20mixture%20mitigates%20radiation-induced%20gastrointestinal%20toxicity&author=L%20Yin&author=P%20Vijaygopal&author=R%20Menon&author=LA%20Vaught&author=M%20Zhang&volume=106&issue=6&publication_year=2014&pages=734-744&pmid=24776907&doi=10.1097/HP.0000000000000117&)\]
117.  Yin L, Gupta R, Vaught L, Grosche A, Okunieff P, Vidyasagar S, 2016. An amino acid-based oral rehydration solution (AA-ORS) enhanced intestinal epithelial proliferation in mice exposed to radiation. Sci. Rep. 6, 37220. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/srep37220)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5120277/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27876791/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Sci.%20Rep&title=An%20amino%20acid-based%20oral%20rehydration%20solution%20\(AA-ORS\)%20enhanced%20intestinal%20epithelial%20proliferation%20in%20mice%20exposed%20to%20radiation&author=L%20Yin&author=R%20Gupta&author=L%20Vaught&author=A%20Grosche&author=P%20Okunieff&volume=6&publication_year=2016&pages=37220&pmid=27876791&doi=10.1038/srep37220&)\]
118.  Yoo SS, Jorgensen TJ, Kennedy AR, Boice JD, Shapiro A, Hu TC, et al. , 2014. Mitigating the risk of radiation-induced cancers limitations and paradigms in drug development. J. Radiol. Prot. 34 (2), R25–R52. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1088/0952-4746/34/2/R25)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7668684/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24727460/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Radiol.%20Prot&title=Mitigating%20the%20risk%20of%20radiation-induced%20cancers%20limitations%20and%20paradigms%20in%20drug%20development&author=SS%20Yoo&author=TJ%20Jorgensen&author=AR%20Kennedy&author=JD%20Boice&author=A%20Shapiro&volume=34&issue=2&publication_year=2014&pages=R25-R52&pmid=24727460&doi=10.1088/0952-4746/34/2/R25&)\]
119.  Zakeri K, Narayanan D, Vikram B, Evans G, Coleman CN, Prasanna PGS, 2019. Decreasing the toxicity of radiation therapy radioprotectors and radiomitigators being developed by the National Cancer Institute through Small Business Innovation Research contracts. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 104 (1), 188–196. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijrobp.2018.12.027)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6458068/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30583040/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.%20J.%20Radiat.%20Oncol.%20Biol.%20Phys&title=Decreasing%20the%20toxicity%20of%20radiation%20therapy%20radioprotectors%20and%20radiomitigators%20being%20developed%20by%20the%20National%20Cancer%20Institute%20through%20Small%20Business%20Innovation%20Research%20contracts&author=K%20Zakeri&author=D%20Narayanan&author=B%20Vikram&author=G%20Evans&author=CN%20Coleman&volume=104&issue=1&publication_year=2019&pages=188-196&pmid=30583040&doi=10.1016/j.ijrobp.2018.12.027&)\]
120.  Zhang L, Li K, Sun R, Zhang Y, Ji J, Huang P, et al. , 2014. Minocycline ameliorates cognitive impairment induced by whole-brain irradiation an animal study. Radiat. Oncol. 9, 281. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13014-014-0281-8)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4271325/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25498371/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Radiat.%20Oncol&title=Minocycline%20ameliorates%20cognitive%20impairment%20induced%20by%20whole-brain%20irradiation%20an%20animal%20study&author=L%20Zhang&author=K%20Li&author=R%20Sun&author=Y%20Zhang&author=J%20Ji&volume=9&publication_year=2014&pages=281&pmid=25498371&doi=10.1186/s13014-014-0281-8&)\]