---
title: "Regulation of Hemocytes in Drosophila Requires dappled Cytochrome b5"
authors: ["Kurt Kleinhesselink", "Corinna Conway", "David Sholer", "Irvin Huang", "Deborah A Kimbrell"]
journal: "Biochemical Genetics"
date: "2011 Jan 30"
doi: "10.1007/s10528-010-9411-7"
source_url: "https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3092937/"
---

# Regulation of Hemocytes in Drosophila Requires dappled Cytochrome b5

*Biochemical Genetics*, 2011 Jan 30, [doi:10.1007/s10528-010-9411-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10528-010-9411-7)

### Kurt Kleinhesselink
### Corinna Conway
### David Sholer
### Irvin Huang
### Deborah A Kimbrell

## Abstract

A major category of mutant hematopoietic phenotypes in _Drosophila_ is melanotic tumors or nodules, which consist of abnormal and overproliferated blood cells, similar to granulomas. Our analyses of the melanotic mutant _dappled_ have revealed a novel type of gene involved in blood cell regulation. The _dappled_ gene is an essential gene that encodes cytochrome b5, a conserved hemoprotein that participates in electron transfer in multiple biochemical reactions and pathways. Viable mutations of _dappled_ cause melanotic nodules and hemocyte misregulation during both hematopoietic waves of development. The sexes are similarly affected, but hemocyte number is different in females and males of both mutants and wild type. Additionally, initial tests show that curcumin enhances the _dappled_ melanotic phenotype and establish screening of endogenous and xenobiotic compounds as a route for analysis of cytochrome b5 function. Overall, _dappled_ provides a tractable genetic model for cytochrome b5, which has been difficult to study in higher organisms.

**Keywords:** Hemocytes, _dappled_, Cytochrome b5, Melanotic tumors, Granulomas

## Introduction

_Drosophila_ is well studied as a model of innate immunity in humans and has been instrumental in establishing principles of defense and gene signaling pathways that involve both immune induction and hematopoiesis (Lemaitre and Hoffmann [2007](#CR36)). The _Drosophila_ Toll pathway mediates the response to microbial infections, and humans were subsequently found to have a family of Toll receptors that also respond to infections. Other shared immune signaling pathways are the Imd (immune deficiency)/TNF1 (tumor necrosis factor 1), JNK (Jun kinase), and JAK-STAT (Janus kinase-STAT transcription factor) pathways. Activation of NFkB transcription factors, which regulate target genes such as cytokines and antimicrobial proteins, is a key shared feature (Wang and Ligoxygakis [2006](#CR72)). Like the signaling pathways, the cell and tissue components of the _Drosophila_ and human immune systems are analogous (Kimbrell and Beutler [2001](#CR31)). In _Drosophila_, the hemocytes and the fat body mediate, respectively, the major cellular and humoral arms of the response. Hemocytes participate in immune signaling to the fat body, phagocytosis, damaged tissue surveillance, encapsulation of foreign intruders, and remodeling of cells during development and also respond to aberrant self-cells to form melanotic tumors/pseudotumors (Babcock et al. [2008](#CR5); Brennan et al. [2007](#CR9); Gateff [1994](#CR23); Rizki and Rizki [1983](#CR55); Tepass et al. [1994](#CR67); Vass and Nappi [2000](#CR71)). The fat body, like the mammalian liver, produces abundant humoral response molecules, including antimicrobial peptides released into the hemolymph (Aggrawal and Silverman [2007](#CR1)).

_Drosophila_ produces three types of hemocytes: plasmatocytes, lamellocytes, and crystal cells (Crozatier and Meister [2007](#CR14)). Plasmatocytes account for ~95% of total blood cells and most functions. In particular, plasmatocytes are responsible for the phagocytosis of microorganisms during an infection and apoptotic cells during development. Lamellocytes are produced only in response to parasites or by mutations that produce melanotic tumors. Crystal cells constitute ~5% of total blood cells and are involved in melanization. As in vertebrates, _Drosophila_ blood cells also have two developmental origins: one early in the embryonic head mesoderm and another during larval development in the lymph gland (Evans et al. [2003](#CR21)). Molecular cascades and factors regulating hematopoiesis are also shared with humans and involve many pathways, for example, Toll, JAK/STAT, Hedgehog, Notch, GATA, and Runx (Evans and Banerjee [2003](#CR20); Mandal et al. [2007](#CR41)).

A major category of mutant hematopoietic phenotypes in _Drosophila_ is that of melanotic tumors or nodules. Melanotic nodules may be in the hemocoel or associated with the lymph glands and consist of abnormal and overproliferated blood cells that are covered by lamellocytes and melanized, similar to the immune response to a parasitic wasp egg (Luo et al. [1995](#CR40); Meister and Lagueux [2003](#CR45); Minakhina and Steward [2006b](#CR48); Stofanko et al. [2008](#CR65)). Mutations in a variety of genes and genetic pathways have been found to produce this phenotype, such as JAK–STAT, which is also associated with blood cell overproliferation in humans, the Toll pathway, and Ras/MAPK (Asha et al. [2003](#CR4); Li [2008](#CR37); Minakhina and Steward [2006a](#CR47); Zettervall et al. [2004](#CR84)). Some other genes with this mutant phenotype are _air_ _8_, encoding ribosomal protein s6 (Watson et al. [1992](#CR75)); _black pearl_, encoding a DnaJ homolog (Becker et al. [2001](#CR6)); _l(3)malignant blood_ neoplasm, encoding a protein with human cytokeratin homology (Gateff [1994](#CR23)); _yantar_, encoding a conserved arginine-rich protein (Sinenko et al. [2004](#CR63)); and the Polycomb group gene _multi sex combs_ (Remillieux-Leschelle et al. [2002](#CR54)). The melanotic tumor genes are an important category to identify and define in order to understand blood cell function and regulation.

In a P-element enhancer detector screen concentrating on immune-related tissues and phenotypes, we identified the melanotic tumor gene _dappled_ (_dpld_) (Rodriguez et al. [1996](#CR56)). Enhancer detector expression of _dappled_ was high in the fat body, oenocytes, ring gland, and gut. Lethal and viable mutations of _dappled_ produced melanotic tumors, and lethal mutation was also associated with aberrant tissue morphology, for example, of the fat body and gut (Rodriguez et al. [1996](#CR56)). A distinguishing feature of _dappled_ mutants is consistent melanotic tumor formation, in contrast to other melanotic tumor mutants, which typically have low and variable rates. We now report identification of _dappled_ as a member of the cytochrome b5 family. Cytochrome b5 is a conserved, ubiquitous, small hemoprotein that participates in electron transfer in multiple biochemical reactions and pathways, such as fatty acid desaturation, cytochrome P450-catalyzed reactions, sterol metabolism, and conversion of methemoglobin (Schenkman and Jansson [2003](#CR59)). Cytochrome b5 is thus involved in processes such as metabolism of endogenous and xenobiotic compounds, maintenance of oxygen levels, and production of steroid hormones (Locuson et al. [2007](#CR39); Miller [2005](#CR46); Yamazaki and Shimada [2006](#CR80)). Cytochrome b5 genetics in higher organisms has not been very amenable to study, and _dappled_ provides a new avenue of approach for study of cytochrome b5 functions. In this report, we characterize the _dappled_ mutant hemocyte phenotype and present the potential to study cytochrome b5 function by screening for compounds that affect the _dappled_ hemocyte phenotype.

## Materials and Methods

### _Drosophila_ Stocks and Rearing

Oregon R flies were used as the standard wild-type strain. The _dappled_ mutants are the _dpld_ _MLB_ (97/16) and _dpld_ _EJL_ (142/2) strains of Rodriguez et al. ([1996](#CR56)). Experiments were performed using _dpld_ _MLB_/_dpld_ _EJL_ transheterozygotes or _dpld_ mutants hemizygous with _Df(2R)ST1_ (Bloomington Stock Center). The _hemese_\-_Gal4_ strain is that of Zettervall et al. ([2004](#CR84)). The _UAS_\-_dappled_ transgenic strain was made using the cDNA clone RE66521 from the Bloomington Drosophila Genome Project, which matched our splice product for _dappled_ mRNA (see below). The insert of plasmid RE66521 was isolated using the _Eco_RI and _Bam_HI restriction enzyme sites, ligated into the _Eco_RI and _Xba_I sites of the pUAST vector using _Bam_HI/_Xba_I linkers, and transgenic strains made by Genetic Services, Inc. Insertion strains of _UAS_\-_dappled_ into chromosomes X, 2, and 3 were recovered. All stocks were raised on the Bloomington Stock Center food recipe in a 25°C incubator. For the curcumin-raised flies, the food, before cooling, was supplemented with 20 mg/ml curcumin (Sigma), and parents were placed onto the food for mating and egg laying. Compare with Gupta et al. ([2009](#CR26)), in which doses for mice were 5, 30, and 60 mg/kg orally, daily for 19 days, and note that at 100 mg/ml, flies had high lethality in addition to developmental delay.

### Molecular Genetic Analysis

Genomic DNA fragments flanking the _dappled_ 97/16 (k09716) and 142/2 (k14202) P-element insertion sites were recovered by the plasmid rescue technique (Wilson et al. [1989](#CR76)), sequenced (Davis Sequencing), and aligned to the genome (Blast). The PCR primers used to compare the 88/15 (k08815) strain P-element insertion sequences [AQ034113](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/AQ034113) and [AQ025871](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/AQ025871) (Tweedie et al. [2009](#CR69)) to wild-type sequences were TATCGTCGCTGTGCTTACAGAT (60, forward) and CTAAACCTCCAATTCGGCTATG (61, reverse) at the [AQ034113](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/AQ034113) end and CTCCACGCGTAATATACCCATT (58, forward) and AGTCATGGATGCGTAGTCACAC (59, reverse) at the [AQ025871](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/AQ025871) end. In order to confirm the 88/15 insertion site, PCR fragments that resulted from the P-element end primer _Rsy_II (Tweedie et al. [2009](#CR69)) in combination with primers 59 and 60 were sequenced. The PCR primers used to test for possible alternative splicing of CG2140/_dappled_ were sequences 55, 56, and 57 (Fig. [1](#Fig1)). The sequence of the single transcript detected was translated to an amino acid sequence and placed into the cytochrome b5 family by Blast comparison. Clustal W was used to align the _dappled_ cytochrome b5 sequence to selected other cytochrome b5 proteins.

### Northern Blot Analysis

Total RNA was isolated using the Totally RNA kit (Ambion), and poly-A RNA was isolated using the Oligotex Direct mRNA Purification kit (Qiagen). The RNA was run on formaldehyde gels and transferred overnight using Ambion Northern Max reagents. The _dappled_ probe was 642 bp defined by the primers 55 and 57 (Fig. [1](#Fig1)). This 642 bp PCR fragment was subcloned using the TA cloning kit (Invitrogen), following the manufacturer’s protocol. After blue/white screening to select the colony, PCR and sequencing were used to confirm the insert and determine orientation. Transcription used T7 polymerase and 32P-labeled UTP and the Ambion Strip EZ kit following the manufacturer’s protocol. The rp49 probe was made using the primers TCCTTCCAGCTTCAAGATGACC (forward) and AGAAGTTCCTGGTGCACAACGT (reverse). Hybridization was overnight, and a Fuji phosphoimager and ImageJ were used to analyze the hybridization signal.

### Blood Cell Counts

Third-instar larvae were developmentally staged as early versus late wandering phase based on retention in the gut of food dye (Zettervall et al. [2004](#CR84)). The Bright-Line Counting Chamber (Fisher) hemocytometer was used to count blood cells stained with monochlorobimane dye (Tirouvanziam et al. [2004](#CR68)) or GFP-expressing blood cells as in Zettervall et al. ([2004](#CR84)), except that instead of red food color we used blue (Deep Blue Shade, Esco Foods, Inc.). Siblings that were heterozygous for _dappled_ were distinguished based on either a CyO balancer with the marker y+ (i.e., _y_; +/_dpld_ vs. _y_; +/_CyO, y_+) or B-galactosidase staining to indicate presence or absence of a _dpld_ enhancer trap (Rodriguez et al. [1996](#CR56)). Separate counts of blood cells in _y_ versus _y_\+ larvae established that _y_ did not affect the blood cell counts. Determination of sex was by the size of the gonads or by marking the sexes with _y_ versus _y_+. Hemocyte counts from different samples were compared using the _t_ test, and _P_ values were calculated using VassarStats ([http://faculty.vassar.edu/lowry/VassarStats.html](http://faculty.vassar.edu/lowry/VassarStats.html)).

## Results

### Cytochrome b5, the Encoded Product of _dappled_

The original _dappled_ alleles, _dpld_ _EJL_ and _dpld_ _MLB_, result from the P-element insertions (P-lacW) in strains 142/2 (k14202) and 97/16 (k09716), respectively (Rodriguez et al. [1996](#CR56)). The _dpld_ _EJL_ allele is homozygous and hemizygous lethal, and _dpld_ _MLB_ is homozygous and hemizygous viable. Heteroallelic _dpld_ _EJL_ _/dpld_ _MLB_ is also viable and, like _dpld_ _EJL_ _and dpld_ _MLB_ homozygotes and hemizygotes, has melanotic tumors (Rodriguez et al. [1996](#CR56)). In order to identify the gene associated with the melanotic tumor phenotype, we molecularly cloned and sequenced the _dappled_ gene. We used the technique of plasmid rescue to isolate the genomic DNA flanking the k14202 and k09716 insertions. Sequencing of the flanking DNA and alignment to the genome placed both insertions into the 5′ UTR of CG2140 (Tweedie et al. [2009](#CR69)), with k09716 46 bp farther upstream than k14202 (Fig. [1](#Fig1)).

In contrast to our results, genome annotation assigned _dappled_ as CG1624 based on the position of the lethal P-element insertion 88/15 (k08815), which did not complement the 142/2 insertion (Spradling et al. [1999](#CR64)). We therefore investigated this discrepancy in the identification of _dappled._ The 5′ and 3′ flanking sequences for the k08815 insertion are 3′-[AQ034113](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/AQ034113) and 5′-[AQ025871](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/AQ025871). Alignment of these flanking sequences on the latest _Drosophila_ genome sequence, however, places them 176,059 bp apart. There are several potential causes for this gap in the sequence: multiple insertions, an error in data reporting, or a large deletion. To test for the accuracy of the k08815 flanking sequence, primers were designed to (1) flank the 3′ and 5′ insertion sites of the k08815 transposon and (2) extend from a P-element end primer (p_Rsy_II) into a flanking sequence. The resultant PCR fragments supported the published flanking sequences, as wild-type products were not observed in the mutant strain and both insertion sites were verified with the P-element end primer (Fig. [1](#Fig1)). Finally, these PCR products were sequenced to provide confirmation of the flanking sequences. These results indicate that k08815 is not a simple insertion but is associated with additional disruption at its genomic position. We set out to differentiate between either multiple insertions or a large deletion by performing complementation tests with other lethal insertion strains in the region. Complementation tests confirmed that a large deletion accompanies the k08815 insertion (Fig. [1](#Fig1)). Complementation and mapping also placed two more insertions, k00107 and 01857, into the 5′ UTR and intron of CG2140/_dappled_, respectively (Fig. [1](#Fig1)).

We tested these various _dappled_ mutants for alterations in transcription, further confirming that the _dappled_ phenotype results from an effect on CG2140, by performing Northern blot analysis using RNA from _dappled_ mutants. This analysis showed a decrease in CG2140 transcript levels in the _dappled_ mutants compared with the Oregon R controls (Fig. [2](#Fig2)). The _dappled_ strains are hypomorphic, with the lethal alleles stronger. The lethal allele _dpld_ _EJL_ expresses approximately 10% of wild-type embryonic RNA levels, whereas the viable allele _dpld_ _MLB_ has ~80% of wild-type adult RNA levels. Analysis of the transcripts by RT-PCR and sequencing showed one splice variant, with a single intron (Fig. [1](#Fig1)).

Based on sequence homology from our alignments and the Flybase Genome Annotation, _Drosophila_ gene CG2140/_dappled_ encodes a microsomal cytochrome b5 (Fig. [1](#Fig1); [http://flybase.org/reports/FBgn0033189.html](http://flybase.org/reports/FBgn0033189.html)). Genome annotation has identified CG2140 as the only cytochrome b5 in _Drosophila_. One related _Drosophila_ sequence has been identified, cytochrome b5-related (Cyt-b5-r; [http://flybase.org/reports/FBgn0000406.html](http://flybase.org/reports/FBgn0000406.html)). Cyt-b5-r has 436 residues (there are only 134 for Dappled and 135 for human cytochrome b5), and only 30 of the Cyt-b5-r residues are identical to the Dappled sequence. In a comparison of the _dappled_ encoded amino acid sequence with a selection of other cytochrome b5 proteins from mammals and insects, Dappled has 45% identity with human cytochrome b5 and 76% identity with housefly cytochrome b5 (Fig. [3](#Fig3)). Overall, the selected mammals and insects have 32% identity. Cytochrome b5 is a highly conserved, ubiquitous family of small hemoproteins that participate in electron transfer in multiple biochemical reactions. These reactions are involved in many biological processes, such as conversion of methemoglobin, sterol metabolism, fatty acid desaturation, and cytochrome P450-catalyzed reactions (Schenkman and Jansson [2003](#CR59)).

### Hemocyte Misregulation and Melanotic Nodule Formation in _dappled_ Mutants

The _dpld_ _MLB_ insertion has made analysis possible, as in addition to producing consistent melanotic tumor formation, it is the only viable allele. Maintenance of _dpld_ _MLB_ homozygotes as a stock, however, was not feasible because of effects on fertility. Homozygous _dpld_ _MLB_ or transheterozygous _dpld_ _MLB_/_dpld_ _EJL_ females and males produced few progeny, even when mated with wild-type flies (<5 progeny/_dappled_ parent), and mutant females laid few eggs (~50/female). It is unlikely that this fertility problem is due simply to physical obstruction in the abdomen, because flies with less obtrusive tumors (i.e., small tumors near the thorax) also show low fertility. To avoid the effects of accumulation of second site mutations by maintaining the _dpld_ _MLB_ chromosome over a balancer, all experiments were done on progeny from crosses that produced transheterozygotes or hemizygotes.

The development of the Gal4–UAS system (Brand and Perrimon [1993](#CR8)) to include drivers for the hematopoietic system makes it more feasible to be able to investigate the blood cell phenotypes of mutant genes, for example, Kimbrell et al. ([2002](#CR32)) and Zettervall et al. ([2004](#CR84)). The _hemese_\-_Gal4_ construct drives expression in blood cells of the plasmatocyte and lamellocyte classes (Zettervall et al. [2004](#CR84)). Strains with _hemese_\-_Gal4 UAS_\-_GFP_ thus have the blood cells marked with GFP, enabling hemocyte counting and phenotype analysis in various genetic strains (Zettervall et al. [2004](#CR84)). We used _hemese_\-_Gal4_ _UAS_\-_GFP_ to investigate the blood cells of _dappled_ melanotic tumor mutants. In melanotic tumors of _dpld_ _EJL_ _/dpld_ _MLB_; _hemese_\-_Gal4 UAS_\-_GFP_ larvae, all of the cells in the masses were found to fluoresce strongly for GFP (Fig. [4](#Fig4)). Cell counts of circulating plasmatocytes and lamellocytes showed large numbers of circulating lamellocytes (Fig. [4](#Fig4)). Lamellocytes are not found in normal, healthy larvae, whereas in melanotic nodule mutants lamellocytes are abundant (Crozatier and Meister [2007](#CR14)). The _dappled_ melanotic tumors are thus specifically designated as melanotic nodules, which consist of hemocytes, as opposed to melanizations, which are non-blood cell tissues that have melanized (Minakhina and Steward [2006b](#CR48)).

Mutant _dappled_ larvae were categorized based on the relative size of the melanotic nodules. Larvae with small versus large melanotic nodules showed different numbers of circulating plasmatocytes and lamellocytes (Fig. [4](#Fig4)). Notably, lamellocytes are more prevalent in small tumors, whereas plasmatocytes are more abundant in large nodules. One possible interpretation of the higher number of lamellocytes in smaller nodules is that these nodules are still actively forming, and lamellocytes are still being recruited to the nodules. During normal larval development, the number of plasmatocytes typically increases two- to threefold from the early wandering (early) to the late wandering (late) stage of the third instar (Crozatier and Meister [2007](#CR14); Zettervall et al. [2004](#CR84)). Plasmatocyte representation from early to late stage wandering was different for small and large tumors. Larvae with large tumors showed an increase from early to late stage, whereas larvae with small tumors did not (Fig. [4](#Fig4)), and this may also reflect the dynamic nature of _dappled_ melanotic nodule formation.

Heterozygosity of _dappled_ does not produce tumors, but it does have a dominant effect on blood cell number. The _dappled_ heterozygotes (Bal/_dpld_) have a significantly higher number of plasmatocytes than wild-type larvae (+/+). This difference was confirmed by counting hemocytes of _dappled_ heterozygotes (_dpld/_+) and their control siblings (Bal/+) (Fig. [5](#Fig5)). Further, counts of siblings showed that the increase in plasmatocytes is present both early and late in the third instar. The relative numbers of lamellocytes in _dappled_ heterozygotes is less clear, as the average was very low, many larvae had no lamellocytes, and the number did not increase from early to late stage (Fig. [5](#Fig5)). Thus, although the lamellocyte data are statistically significant (_P_ < 0.05), _dappled_ heterozygosity at most yields a very weak induction of lamellocyte differentiation.

### Rescue of Hemocyte Phenotype but Not Lethality by Wild-Type _dappled_ in Blood Cells

We next asked if the _dappled_ phenotype could be rescued by expressing wild-type _dappled_ only in blood cells. We constructed a plasmid containing _UAS_\-_dpld_, which was used to make transgenic strains with _UAS_\-_dpld_ in different chromosomal locations. The _hemese_\-_Gal4_ was then used to drive _UAS_\-_dpld,_ and the rates of melanotic nodule formation were compared in _dappled_ mutants and controls. In addition to hemocytes, _hemese_\-_Gal4_ drives strong expression in the salivary glands, so a control salivary gland driver, _sgs3_\-_Gal4_, was also used to drive _UAS_\-_dpld_. To test for rescue of lethality by ubiquitous expression, the _da_\-_Gal4_ driver (Pili-Floury et al. [2004](#CR51)) was used.

The _dappled_ mutants with _hemese_\-_Gal4_, but not _sgs3_\-_Gal4_, driving _UAS_\-_dpld_ are rescued from the melanotic phenotype. Three different _UAS_\-_dpld_ insertions were tested with _hemese_\-_Gal4_, and all showed similar rates of rescue (Table [1](#Tab1)). Dissections were performed to determine if blood cell nodules might be forming but not melanizing. The dissections confirmed that blood cell nodule formation without accompanying melanization did not occur.

#### Table 1.

Melanotic tumor phenotype is rescued by _dappled_ expression in hemocytes

| Cell type | _Gal4; UAS_ | Percentage (_n_) of adultsa with melanotic nodules | Total _N_ |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Negative controlb | Positive controlc | Rescue testd |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Blood cells | _hemese_\-_Gal4; UAS_\-_dpld_ line 1 | 0% (352) | 87.5% (32) | 5% (121) | 505 |
| _hemese_\-_Gal4; UAS_\-_dpld_ line 3a | 0% (526) | 94.1% (43) | 7.5% (105) | 674 |
| _hemese_\-_Gal4; UAS_\-_dpld_ line 9b | 0% (353) | 93% (17) | 5.7% (106) | 476 |
| Control | _sgs3_\-_Gal4; UAS_\-_dpld_ e | 0% (514) | 89.3% (75) | 81.6% (103) | 692 |

aAdults are progeny from crosses of _w; CyO/dpldMLB; Gal4_ females with _w/Y; CyO/dpldEJL; TM3,Sb_ or _UAS_\-_dpld/UAS_\-_dpld_ males

bAll genotypes with _CyO/dpldMLB_ or _EJL_. Two thirds of the progeny are expected to be in this category

c _dpld_ transheterozygotes with _Gal4_ or _UAS_

d _dpld_ transheterozygotes with both _Gal4_ and _UAS_

eResults with all three _UAS_\-_dpld_ lines

The dominant effect of heterozygous _dappled_ on plasmatocyte number is also rescued by adding _dappled_ expression to blood cells. Hemocyte counts of _dappled_ heterozygotes with _hemese_\-_Gal4_ driving _UAS_\-_dpld_ had, on average, reduced numbers of hemocytes, compared with control _dappled_ heterozygotes (Fig. [6](#Fig6)). The number of lamellocytes in heterozygotes was also reduced on average, but with the small number and variability in lamellocytes, was not significantly different (Fig. [6](#Fig6)). These results do not necessarily rule out other tissues as important for the _dappled_ mutant blood cell phenotypes, but rather emphasize that the level of _dappled_ expression in the blood cells regulates number and differentiation.

Expression of wild-type _dappled_ in blood cells did not rescue the mutant lethality. In contrast, ubiquitous expression of wild-type _dappled_ completely rescued the mutant lethality, producing normal adults with no tumors (Table [2](#Tab2)). These results are consistent with the aberrant tissue morphology of lethal _dappled_ (Rodriguez et al. [1996](#CR56)) and establish the importance of _dappled_ transcript levels for normal function in other tissues.

#### Table 2.

Hemocyte expression of _dappled_ is insufficient for rescue of lethality

| Expression type | _Gal4; UAS_ | Percentage (_n_) survival of adultsa | Total _N_ |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Controlb | Rescue testc |
| --- | --- |
| Ubiquitous | _daughterless_\-_Gal4; UAS_\-_dpld_ | 84.6% (1503) | 15.4% (273) | 1776 |
| Blood cells | _hemese_\-_Gal4; UAS_\-_dpld_ | 100% (1086) | 0% (0) | 1086 |

aAdults are progeny from crosses of _w; CyO/dpldEJL;TM3,Sb_ or _UAS_\-_dpld/UAS_\-_dpld_ females with _w/Y; CyO/Df1888;TM3,Sb/Gal4_ males

b _CyO/dpldEJL_ or _CyO/Df(2R)ST1_ with _Gal4_ or _UAS_. 85% of the total progeny are expected to be in this category

c _dpldEJL/Df(2R)ST1_ with both _Gal4_ and _UAS_. 15% of the total progeny are expected to be in this category

### Effect of _dappled_ on Hematopoietic Waves During Development

The _dappled_ nodules form early in larval development, which is more consistent with an increase of plasmatocytes from the first hematopoietic wave (embryonic origin) rather than the second hematopoietic wave (lymph gland origin at the end of the third instar). As noted above, plasmatocytes in _dappled_ tumors express the _hemese_\-_Gal4_ driver, which does not express in the lymph glands, further indicating an early developmental origin for these cells. Additionally, the lymph glands appear normal, at least at a gross level, and only one _dappled_ enhancer trap expresses in the lymph glands (Rodriguez et al. [1996](#CR56)). We analyzed 1 kb of the _dappled_ upstream region for potential binding by blood cell, lymph gland, and other transcription factors using the Transfac database (Wingender [2008](#CR77)) provided by Biobase Biological Databases ([http://www.biobase-international.com/index.php?id=home](http://www.biobase-international.com/index.php?id=home)). Among the transcription factor binding sites are many that are predicted to be T cell factor/pan binding sites (Brunner et al. [1997](#CR11)), consistent with blood cell expression, and tinman/Nkx2.5 binding sites (Kimbrell et al. [2002](#CR32)), suggesting lymph gland expression (Table [3](#Tab3)).

#### Table 3.

Predicted T cell factor/pangolin and Nkx 2.5/tinman sites

<table><tbody><tr><td colspan="2" rowspan="1">T cell factor/pangolin</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">&nbsp;−730</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">(+) 1.000 0.994 gcgtaTCAAAagcaca TCF</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">&nbsp;−687</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">(−) 0.964 0.946 gcttagTTTGTtgtta TCF</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">&nbsp;−611</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">(−) 0.928 0.919 gactgtTTTTAttgaa TCF</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">&nbsp;−440</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">(−) 0.928 0.929 atacatTTTTAttaat TCF</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">&nbsp;−430</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">(+) 0.928 0.922 attaaTGAAAtggtct TCF</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">&nbsp;−408</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">(−) 0.957 0.938 aataaaTTTGCttacg TCF</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">&nbsp;−395</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">(−) 0.964 0.948 acgaatTTTGTttgta TCF</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">&nbsp;−383</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">(−) 0.928 0.922 tgtacaTTTCAtttga TCF</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">&nbsp;−170</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">(+) 0.964 0.944 tgtaaACAAAttataa TCF</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2" rowspan="1">Nkx 2.5/tinman</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">&nbsp;−939</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">(−) 0.801 0.786 tgattgAAGTTggcaa NKX2.5</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">&nbsp;−935</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">(+) 0.869 0.828 tgAAGTT NKX2.5</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">&nbsp;−923</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">(−) 0.869 0.870 AACTTaa NKX2.5</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">&nbsp;−896</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">(+) 1.000 0.859 cccgtCACTTgaatta NKX2.5</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">&nbsp;−894</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">(+) 1.000 0.971 cgtCACTTga NKX2.5</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">&nbsp;−891</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">(−) 1.000 1.000 CACTTga NKX2.5</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">&nbsp;−795</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">(+) 0.844 0.805 taggcCACTCcaggat NKX2.5</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">&nbsp;−780</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">(+) 0.800 0.819 tgcCAATTgc NKX2.5</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">&nbsp;−761</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">(−) 0.869 0.823 AACTTac NKX2.5</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">&nbsp;−711</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">(+) 1.000 0.741 gccgtCACTTatcaat NKX2.5</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">&nbsp;−709</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">(+) 1.000 0.906 cgtCACTTat NKX2.5</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">&nbsp;−706</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">(−) 1.000 0.939 CACTTat NKX2.5</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">&nbsp;−677</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">(+) 0.801 0.732 ttgttAACTTgaattg NKX2.5</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">&nbsp;−672</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">(−) 0.869 0.884 AACTTga NKX2.5</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">&nbsp;−551</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">(+) 0.869 0.828 tgAAGTC NKX2.5</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">&nbsp;−429</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">(−) 0.788 0.751 ttaatgAAATGgtctg NKX2.5</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">&nbsp;−377</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">(+) 0.800 0.815 tttCATTTga NKX2.5</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">&nbsp;−374</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">(−) 0.783 0.808 CATTTga NKX2.5</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">&nbsp;−235</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">(+) 0.833 0.818 tgatcCACTAtacaat NKX2.5</td></tr><tr><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">&nbsp;−145</td><td colspan="1" rowspan="1">(+) 0.869 0.823 atAAGTT NKX2.5</td></tr></tbody></table>

Predicted by Transfac Professional Match 2009.3, provided by Biobase Biological Databases

We tested for _dappled_ effects in both hematopoietic waves by counting plasmatocytes at a time in development when cells of both hematopoietic waves are present. Cells of the two waves were differentiated by (1) using _hemese_\-_Gal4_ to drive _UAS_\-_GFP_ in cells from the first wave of development, so that first-wave cells fluoresced green, and (2) staining all hemocytes with monochlorobimane dye, so that the second-wave hemocytes fluoresced blue but not green. The developmental stage selected to have both sets of hemocytes was white prepupae, age 0–3 h postformation as white prepupae. These results show that heterozygosity of _dappled_ increases the number of plasmatocytes from both hematopoietic waves (Table [4](#Tab4)).

#### Table 4.

Hemocyte number differs by sex during development in wild type and _dappled_

| Genotype | Sex | Number of hemocytes (±95% confidence interval) |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Average for embryonic origin | Average for lymph gland origin | Total cells |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Wild type | Male | 3380 (±753) | 4610 (±942) | 7990 (±1237) |
| Female | 5413 (±1492) | 6956 (±1505) | 12369 (±2109) |
| _P_, male vs. female | <0.01 | <0.001 | <0.01 |
| _dpld_ a | Male | 6455 (±1128) | 6675 (±1268) | 13130 (±1716) |
| Female | 8628 (±1879) | 8987 (±1374) | 17615 (±3013) |
| _P_, male vs. female | <0.05 | <0.01 | <0.01 |
| Wild type vs. _dpld_ a | _P_, male vs. male | <0.001 | <0.01 | <0.001 |
| _P_, female vs. female | <0.01 | <0.05 | <0.01 |

a _dpld_ heterozygotes, _dpldEJL_/+

Mutation of _dappled_ affects both sexes similarly, and our results show both sexes together (Figs. [4](#Fig4), [5](#Fig5), [6](#Fig6)). Similar numbers of the sexes are needed per sample, however, as the sexes differ in the number of hemocytes. For the experiment depicted in Table [4](#Tab4), we separated the sexes in order to demonstrate this finding and test for a sex difference in the second hematopoietic wave as well. The results are that in both wild type and _dappled_ there is a significant difference between males and females in the number of hemocytes for both hematopoietic waves.

### Curcumin Enhancement of the _dappled_ Melanotic Phenotype

Cytochrome b5 is widely studied for its effects on drug metabolism, and conversely, various drugs are investigated for alteration of cytochrome b5 levels (El-Lakkany et al. [2004](#CR19); Juvonen et al. [1992](#CR30); Portoles et al. [1989](#CR52); Schenkman and Jansson [1999](#CR58); Sheweita [2004](#CR61); Yamaori et al. [2003](#CR79); Yamazaki et al. [2002](#CR81)). We hypothesized that modulation of the _dappled_ phenotype could be used as an in vivo assay for cytochrome b5 related effects of endogenous and xenobiotic compounds. We are therefore screening compounds with a known connection to cytochrome P450s and/or anti-inflammatory and anticarcinogenic properties for enhancement or suppression of the _dappled_ melanotic phenotype. Initial studies with aspirin and the corticosteroid dexamethasone are negative (data not shown), whereas curcumin, the active ingredient in the spice turmeric, has consistently shown an enhancement of the melanotic phenotype (Table [5](#Tab5); Fig. [7](#Fig7)). Adult _dappled_ mutants that have been raised (egg to adult) on curcumin-supplemented food have an enhanced melanotic phenotype, showing more and/or larger melanotic tumors (Table [5](#Tab5)). The enhanced phenotype of the _dappled_ mutants is already evident in the larval stages (Fig. [7](#Fig7)). Adult _dappled_ heterozygotes, however, do not develop a melanotic phenotype when raised on curcumin (Table [5](#Tab5)). Since both the heterozygotes and heteroallelic mutants have some reduction in _dappled_ transcript levels, the effects of curcumin may depend on the exact amount of cytochrome b5 protein that is produced.

#### Table 5.

Curcumin enhances the melanotic tumor phenotype of _dappled_

| Diet | Percentage of adultsa with melanotic tumors |
| --- | --- |
| Genotypeb (_N_) | Melanotic nodule severity (%)c |
| --- | --- |
| Balancer | _dpld_ | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Normal | 0% (373) | 90.3% (154) | 0.6 | 3.9 | 59.1 | 25.3 | 1.3 | 9.7 |
| Curcumin supplement | 0% (762) | 87.1% (310) | 1.6 | 26.8 | 56.1 | 1.3 | 1.3 | 12.9 |

aAdults are progeny from crosses between _w; CyO/dpldMLB_ and _w; CyO/dpldEJL_

b“Balancer” indicates heterozygous _CyO/dpldMLB_ or _EJL_. “_dpld_” indicates transheterozygous _dpldMLB/dpldEJL_

cSeverity decreases left to right. Category 1 is defined as multiple small nodules; 2, single large or >1 typical nodule; 3, typical nodule; 4, small nodule; 5, very small nodule; 6, no nodule

## Discussion

We have identified _dappled_ as a member of the conserved, ubiquitous cytochrome b5 family. The complexities of cytochrome b5 function, through its participation in electron transfer in multiple biochemical reactions, are reflected in the difficulties and limited study of its genetics in higher organisms. Characterizations in humans have shown that cytochrome b5 mutation causes methemoglobinemia, which interferes with the balance between hemoglobin and methemoglobin, thus affecting oxygenation and inflammation (Hegesh et al. [1986](#CR27); Umbreit [2007](#CR70)). Mutation of cytochrome b5 reductase also causes methemoglobinemia and is more common (Davis et al. [2004](#CR16)). In addition, one case of cytochrome b5 methemoglobinemia may also have been associated with hormonal defects (Giordano et al. [1994](#CR25)). With the exception of a porcine mutation associated with an altered androstenone level (Lin et al. [2005](#CR38)), cytochrome b5 mutations in other organisms have not been identified. In mice, cytochrome b5 deletion is also lethal, but experiments with a tissue-specific knockout have allowed liver function to be addressed (Finn et al. [2008](#CR22)). With our studies of _dappled_, _Drosophila_ now provides a tractable genetic model for the study of cytochrome b5 in blood cells and other tissues.

Hemocytes are particularly sensitive to mutation of _dappled_ and show that cytochrome b5 functions to produce normal differentiation and numbers of hemocytes. Mutation of one copy of _dappled_ results in a significant increase in the number of circulating hemocytes, and mutation of both copies results in the formation of melanotic nodules. The formation of _dappled_ melanotic nodules is a Class 2 reaction in the classification of Watson et al. ([1991](#CR74)), in which Class 2 represents alteration of immune cells and Class 1 represents normal immune cells responding to other cell types that are aberrant. The dominant effect on blood cell number emphasizes that wild-type levels of cytochrome b5 are needed for full normal functions. In humans, levels of cytochrome b5 have been implicated as important with respect to xenobiotic metabolism and health. Kurian et al. ([2007](#CR34)) hypothesized that functionally significant genetic variability in cytochrome b5 occurs in individuals without clinical symptoms. They investigated processing of hydroxylamines, which are oxidative products of arylamine drugs and environmental carcinogens, by the mutant cytochrome b5 of one heterozygous individual and found, in vitro, altered affinity for hydroxylamine substrates and dramatically reduced cytochrome b5 expression (Kurian et al. [2007](#CR34)).

Expression of wild-type _dappled_ in hemocytes rescued both the increase in blood cell number and the formation of melanotic nodules. The driver used was _hemese_\-_Gal4_, which is active in circulating plasmatocytes and sessile hemocytes, but not the lymph glands (Markus et al. [2009](#CR42); Zettervall et al. [2004](#CR84)). Interestingly, the sessile hemocytes are a newly discovered hematopoietic site and appear to be the main developmental origin of lamellocytes (Markus et al. [2009](#CR42)). This site of expression may be the key factor in rescuing the _dappled_ melanotic nodule phenotype. Rescue of the plasmatocyte increase in _dappled_ heterozygotes is expected to result from the _hemese_\-_Gal4_ expression in circulating blood cells of the first hematopoietic wave, both because of the age of the larvae (prerelease of lymph gland cells) and because _hemese_\-_Gal4_ does not express in lymph glands. However, _dappled_ also increased the number of hemocytes from the second hematopoietic wave. Hemocytes from both developmental origins, embryonic and lymph gland, require _dappled_ in order to be produced in normal amounts. It is an interesting question as to whether the plasmatocyte increase in _dappled_ mutants can be independently controlled in the first and second hematopoietic waves.

Does the increase in plasmatocytes indicate overproliferation or less apoptosis? Since _dappled_ encodes a cytochrome b5, the obvious choice would be apoptosis rather than overproliferation. There are two problems with this choice: it is mitochondrial cytochrome b5 that is established in the canonical cytochrome C signaling apoptotic pathway, and the use of that pathway by _Drosophila_ is controversial (Kornbluth and White [2005](#CR33); Means and Hays [2007](#CR44); Oberst et al. [2008](#CR49); Ow et al. [2008](#CR50)). Microsomal cytochrome b5, however, has also been suggested to be involved in cytochrome C mediated apoptosis (Davydov [2001](#CR17)), and _Drosophila_ may have its own version of apoptotic signaling that uses the _dappled_ cytochrome b5. Further, blood cells are well described for their role in response to apoptotic cells, but the role of their own apoptosis in development and infection is not clear (Bruckner et al. [2004](#CR10); Crozatier and Meister [2007](#CR14); Lemaitre and Hoffmann [2007](#CR36)).

The sensitivity of hemocytes (compared with other cell types) to _dappled_ mutation may result from blood cell mitotic cell division continuing during development (Crozatier and Meister [2007](#CR14)). There are many potential mechanisms for _dappled_ to affect overproliferation, especially given the increasingly complex functions of plasmatocytes (Charroux and Royet [2009](#CR13)). One option consistent with cytochrome b5 function, and potentially the _dappled_ effects on fertility, is that hormonal signaling of hematopoiesis is affected. In that case, however, rescue of the _dappled_ blood cell phenotype would be predicted by adding back wild-type _dappled_ expression in the steroid-producing ring gland (Gilbert [2004](#CR24)) rather than hemocytes. Alternatively, _dappled_ expression could rescue a steroid-processing step in the hemocytes.

An intriguing option is that cytochrome b5 has a new, previously unidentified role in blood cell signaling pathways, for example, through JAK/Stat or JNK. More specifically, a candidate to mediate the effects of _dappled_ is TNF-receptor associated factor 6 (Traf6), which is predicted from protein studies to interact with cytochrome b5 (Drosophila Interactions Database, [http://www.droidb.org](http://www.droidb.org/)). Among its activities, Traf6 is an upstream activator of nuclear factor-kappaB, and mutants are immune response defective (Cha et al. [2003](#CR12); Wu and Arron [2003](#CR78)). Cytochrome b5 involvement with Traf6 is a testable hypothesis through analysis of genetic interaction between _dappled_ and _Traf6_ mutants.

Our results with curcumin demonstrate that screening of endogenous and xenobiotic compounds for effects on the _dappled_ phenotypes can be done as an in vivo approach for analysis of cytochrome b5. Curcumin is widely studied for its potential as a nutritional pharmaceutical (Duvoix et al. [2005](#CR18); Jagetia and Aggarwal [2007](#CR29)). Among its many activities, which are mainly anti-inflammatory and anticancer, curcumin inhibits cytochrome P450s, down-regulates NFkB, and affects apoptosis and the cell cycle (Alpers [2008](#CR2); Appiah-Opong et al. [2007](#CR3); Kwon et al. [2007](#CR35); Sa and Das [2008](#CR57)). Curcumin enhanced the melanotic phenotype of _dappled_ mutants. This effect of curcumin is consistent with NFkB involvement, but there are other alternatives, in particular, cytochrome P450 processing in the fat body.

Mutation of _dappled_ showed similar effects in females and males, but an unexpected consequence of our studies is the finding that females and males differ significantly in the number of circulating blood cells. In humans, a difference between the sexes in the numbers of blood cell types is well established, but the effects are unclear (Blum and Pabst [2007](#CR7); Huppert et al. [1998](#CR28); Reichert et al. [1991](#CR53)). In both humans and _Drosophila_, there are differences in the immune responses between the sexes that affect health (Dale et al. [2006](#CR15); Marriott and Huet-Hudson [2006](#CR43); Shames [2002](#CR60); Taylor and Kimbrell [2007](#CR66); Ye et al. [2009](#CR82); Zandman-Goddard et al. [2007](#CR83)), and the blood cell number differential may be part of mediating the immune response differences. Recently, _Drosophila_ hemocytes have been shown to directly signal immune induction of the fat body, and a reduced number of hemocytes resulted in less immune induction (Shia et al. [2009](#CR62)). In _Drosophila_, the increase in hemocytes of _dappled_ and females may result in higher immune induction, which may or may not provide a healthier condition. For example, human females typically have a more robust immune response but also a higher incidence of autoimmune disorders (Dale et al. [2006](#CR15); Zandman-Goddard et al. [2007](#CR83)).

Cytochrome b5 expression is critical for survival, and its importance to hemocytes and additional tissues is emphasized by the finding that ubiquitous, but not hemocyte, expression of wild-type _dappled_ rescued lethality. The functions of cytochrome b5 are open for testing in a wide range of tissue types using _dappled_. In all respects, genetic interaction and drug screens for suppressors and enhancers of _dappled_ will be useful ways to discern the many roles of cytochrome b5 function.

## Acknowledgments

We thank the Bloomington Stock Center for fly strains and Dan Hultmark for the _hemese_\-_Gal4_ stock. We are grateful to Kathleen Beckingham, Jeanette Natzle, Ylva Engstrom, and John Kiger for discussions and comments on the manuscript. We are also grateful to Chyong-Yi Wu and Edward Yonter for early work on plasmid rescue and fertility, Katherine Taylor for assistance with tumor rescue tests, and Genetic Services, Inc., for transgenic strains. This work was supported by grants NIH R01GM61458, NASA NNA04CC76A, and American Cancer Society IM697B/9302006CIM to DAK.

### Open Access

This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.

## Footnotes

GenBank Accession Number [HQ864711](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/HQ864711) dappled.

## References

1.  Aggrawal K, Silverman N. Peptidoglycan recognition in Drosophila. Biochem Soc Trans. 2007;35:1496–1500. doi: 10.1042/BST0351496. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1042/BST0351496)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18031252/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Biochem%20Soc%20Trans&title=Peptidoglycan%20recognition%20in%20Drosophila&author=K%20Aggrawal&author=N%20Silverman&volume=35&publication_year=2007&pages=1496-1500&pmid=18031252&doi=10.1042/BST0351496&)\]
2.  Alpers DH. The potential use of curcumin in management of chronic disease: too good to be true? Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2008;24:173–175. doi: 10.1097/MOG.0b013e3282f44a19. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/MOG.0b013e3282f44a19)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18301267/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr%20Opin%20Gastroenterol&title=The%20potential%20use%20of%20curcumin%20in%20management%20of%20chronic%20disease:%20too%20good%20to%20be%20true?&author=DH%20Alpers&volume=24&publication_year=2008&pages=173-175&pmid=18301267&doi=10.1097/MOG.0b013e3282f44a19&)\]
3.  Appiah-Opong R, Commandeur JN, van Vugt-Lussenburg B, Vermeulen NP. Inhibition of human recombinant cytochrome P450s by curcumin and curcumin decomposition products. Toxicology. 2007;235:83–91. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2007.03.007. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tox.2007.03.007)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17433521/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Toxicology&title=Inhibition%20of%20human%20recombinant%20cytochrome%20P450s%20by%20curcumin%20and%20curcumin%20decomposition%20products&author=R%20Appiah-Opong&author=JN%20Commandeur&author=B%20van%20Vugt-Lussenburg&author=NP%20Vermeulen&volume=235&publication_year=2007&pages=83-91&pmid=17433521&doi=10.1016/j.tox.2007.03.007&)\]
4.  Asha H, Nagy I, Kovacs G, Stetson D, Ando I, Dearolf CR. Analysis of Ras-induced overproliferation in Drosophila hemocytes. Genetics. 2003;163:203–215. doi: 10.1093/genetics/163.1.203. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/163.1.203)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1462399/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12586708/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genetics&title=Analysis%20of%20Ras-induced%20overproliferation%20in%20Drosophila%20hemocytes&author=H%20Asha&author=I%20Nagy&author=G%20Kovacs&author=D%20Stetson&author=I%20Ando&volume=163&publication_year=2003&pages=203-215&pmid=12586708&doi=10.1093/genetics/163.1.203&)\]
5.  Babcock DT, Brock AR, Fish GS, Wang Y, Perrin L, Krasnow MA, Galko MJ. Circulating blood cells function as a surveillance system for damaged tissue in Drosophila larvae. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2008;105:10017–10022. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0709951105. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0709951105)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2474562/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18632567/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc%20Natl%20Acad%20Sci%20USA&title=Circulating%20blood%20cells%20function%20as%20a%20surveillance%20system%20for%20damaged%20tissue%20in%20Drosophila%20larvae&author=DT%20Babcock&author=AR%20Brock&author=GS%20Fish&author=Y%20Wang&author=L%20Perrin&volume=105&publication_year=2008&pages=10017-10022&pmid=18632567&doi=10.1073/pnas.0709951105&)\]
6.  Becker S, Gehrsitz A, Bork P, Buchner S, Buchner E. The black-pearl gene of Drosophila defines a novel conserved protein family and is required for larval growth and survival. Gene. 2001;262:15–22. doi: 10.1016/S0378-1119(00)00548-5. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-1119\(00\)00548-5)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11179663/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Gene&title=The%20black-pearl%20gene%20of%20Drosophila%20defines%20a%20novel%20conserved%20protein%20family%20and%20is%20required%20for%20larval%20growth%20and%20survival&author=S%20Becker&author=A%20Gehrsitz&author=P%20Bork&author=S%20Buchner&author=E%20Buchner&volume=262&publication_year=2001&pages=15-22&pmid=11179663&doi=10.1016/S0378-1119\(00\)00548-5&)\]
7.  Blum KS, Pabst R. Lymphocyte numbers and subsets in the human blood. Do they mirror the situation in all organs? Immunol Lett. 2007;108:45–51. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2006.10.009. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.imlet.2006.10.009)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17129612/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Immunol%20Lett&title=Lymphocyte%20numbers%20and%20subsets%20in%20the%20human%20blood.%20Do%20they%20mirror%20the%20situation%20in%20all%20organs?&author=KS%20Blum&author=R%20Pabst&volume=108&publication_year=2007&pages=45-51&pmid=17129612&doi=10.1016/j.imlet.2006.10.009&)\]
8.  Brand AH, Perrimon N. Targeted gene expression as a means of altering cell fates and generating dominant phenotypes. Development. 1993;118:401–415. doi: 10.1242/dev.118.2.401. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.118.2.401)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8223268/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Development&title=Targeted%20gene%20expression%20as%20a%20means%20of%20altering%20cell%20fates%20and%20generating%20dominant%20phenotypes&author=AH%20Brand&author=N%20Perrimon&volume=118&publication_year=1993&pages=401-415&pmid=8223268&doi=10.1242/dev.118.2.401&)\]
9.  Brennan CA, Delaney JR, Schneider DS, Anderson KV. Psidin is required in Drosophila blood cells for both phagocytic degradation and immune activation of the fat body. Curr Biol. 2007;17:67–72. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2006.11.026. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2006.11.026)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17208189/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr%20Biol&title=Psidin%20is%20required%20in%20Drosophila%20blood%20cells%20for%20both%20phagocytic%20degradation%20and%20immune%20activation%20of%20the%20fat%20body&author=CA%20Brennan&author=JR%20Delaney&author=DS%20Schneider&author=KV%20Anderson&volume=17&publication_year=2007&pages=67-72&pmid=17208189&doi=10.1016/j.cub.2006.11.026&)\]
10.  Bruckner K, Kockel L, Duchek P, Luque CM, Rorth P, Perrimon N. The PDGF/VEGF receptor controls blood cell survival in Drosophila. Dev Cell. 2004;7:73–84. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2004.06.007. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2004.06.007)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15239955/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Dev%20Cell&title=The%20PDGF/VEGF%20receptor%20controls%20blood%20cell%20survival%20in%20Drosophila&author=K%20Bruckner&author=L%20Kockel&author=P%20Duchek&author=CM%20Luque&author=P%20Rorth&volume=7&publication_year=2004&pages=73-84&pmid=15239955&doi=10.1016/j.devcel.2004.06.007&)\]
11.  Brunner E, Peter O, Schweizer L, Basler K. Pangolin encodes a Lef-1 homologue that acts downstream of Armadillo to transduce the Wingless signal in Drosophila. Nature. 1997;385:829–833. doi: 10.1038/385829a0. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/385829a0)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9039917/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nature&title=Pangolin%20encodes%20a%20Lef-1%20homologue%20that%20acts%20downstream%20of%20Armadillo%20to%20transduce%20the%20Wingless%20signal%20in%20Drosophila&author=E%20Brunner&author=O%20Peter&author=L%20Schweizer&author=K%20Basler&volume=385&publication_year=1997&pages=829-833&pmid=9039917&doi=10.1038/385829a0&)\]
12.  Cha GH, Cho KS, Lee JH, Kim M, Kim E, Park J, Lee SB, Chung J. Discrete functions of TRAF1 and TRAF2 in Drosophilamelanogaster mediated by c-Jun N-terminal kinase and NF-kappaB-dependent signaling pathways. Mol Cell Biol. 2003;23:7982–7991. doi: 10.1128/MCB.23.22.7982-7991.2003. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.23.22.7982-7991.2003)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC262421/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14585960/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol%20Cell%20Biol&title=Discrete%20functions%20of%20TRAF1%20and%20TRAF2%20in%20Drosophilamelanogaster%20mediated%20by%20c-Jun%20N-terminal%20kinase%20and%20NF-kappaB-dependent%20signaling%20pathways&author=GH%20Cha&author=KS%20Cho&author=JH%20Lee&author=M%20Kim&author=E%20Kim&volume=23&publication_year=2003&pages=7982-7991&pmid=14585960&doi=10.1128/MCB.23.22.7982-7991.2003&)\]
13.  Charroux B, Royet J. Elimination of plasmatocytes by targeted apoptosis reveals their role in multiple aspects of the Drosophila immune response. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2009;106:9797–9802. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0903971106. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0903971106)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2700997/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19482944/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc%20Natl%20Acad%20Sci%20USA&title=Elimination%20of%20plasmatocytes%20by%20targeted%20apoptosis%20reveals%20their%20role%20in%20multiple%20aspects%20of%20the%20Drosophila%20immune%20response&author=B%20Charroux&author=J%20Royet&volume=106&publication_year=2009&pages=9797-9802&pmid=19482944&doi=10.1073/pnas.0903971106&)\]
14.  Crozatier M, Meister M. Drosophila haematopoiesis. Cell Microbiol. 2007;9:1117–1126. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2007.00930.x. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1462-5822.2007.00930.x)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17394559/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell%20Microbiol&title=Drosophila%20haematopoiesis&author=M%20Crozatier&author=M%20Meister&volume=9&publication_year=2007&pages=1117-1126&pmid=17394559&doi=10.1111/j.1462-5822.2007.00930.x&)\]
15.  Dale E, Davis M, Faustman DL. A role for transcription factor NF-kappaB in autoimmunity: possible interactions of genes, sex, and the immune response. Adv Physiol Educ. 2006;30:152–158. doi: 10.1152/advan.00065.2006. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1152/advan.00065.2006)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17108242/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Adv%20Physiol%20Educ&title=A%20role%20for%20transcription%20factor%20NF-kappaB%20in%20autoimmunity:%20possible%20interactions%20of%20genes,%20sex,%20and%20the%20immune%20response&author=E%20Dale&author=M%20Davis&author=DL%20Faustman&volume=30&publication_year=2006&pages=152-158&pmid=17108242&doi=10.1152/advan.00065.2006&)\]
16.  Davis CA, Crowley LJ, Barber MJ. Cytochrome b5 reductase: the roles of the recessive congenital methemoglobinemia mutants P144L, L148P, and R159\*. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2004;431:233–244. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2004.08.005. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.abb.2004.08.005)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15488472/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Arch%20Biochem%20Biophys&title=Cytochrome%20b5%20reductase:%20the%20roles%20of%20the%20recessive%20congenital%20methemoglobinemia%20mutants%20P144L,%20L148P,%20and%20R159*&author=CA%20Davis&author=LJ%20Crowley&author=MJ%20Barber&volume=431&publication_year=2004&pages=233-244&pmid=15488472&doi=10.1016/j.abb.2004.08.005&)\]
17.  Davydov DR. Microsomal monooxygenase in apoptosis: another target for cytochrome c signaling? Trends Biochem Sci. 2001;26:155–160. doi: 10.1016/S0968-0004(00)01749-7. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0968-0004\(00\)01749-7)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11246020/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Trends%20Biochem%20Sci&title=Microsomal%20monooxygenase%20in%20apoptosis:%20another%20target%20for%20cytochrome%20c%20signaling?&author=DR%20Davydov&volume=26&publication_year=2001&pages=155-160&pmid=11246020&doi=10.1016/S0968-0004\(00\)01749-7&)\]
18.  Duvoix A, Blasius R, Delhalle S, Schnekenburger M, Morceau F, Henry E, Dicato M, Diederich M. Chemopreventive and therapeutic effects of curcumin. Cancer Lett. 2005;223:181–190. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2004.09.041. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.canlet.2004.09.041)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15896452/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cancer%20Lett&title=Chemopreventive%20and%20therapeutic%20effects%20of%20curcumin&author=A%20Duvoix&author=R%20Blasius&author=S%20Delhalle&author=M%20Schnekenburger&author=F%20Morceau&volume=223&publication_year=2005&pages=181-190&pmid=15896452&doi=10.1016/j.canlet.2004.09.041&)\]
19.  El-Lakkany NM, Seif el-Din SH, Badawy AA, Ebeid FA. Effect of artemether alone and in combination with grapefruit juice on hepatic drug-metabolising enzymes and biochemical aspects in experimental Schistosoma mansoni. Int J Parasitol. 2004;34:1405–1412. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2004.08.012. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpara.2004.08.012)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15542101/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int%20J%20Parasitol&title=Effect%20of%20artemether%20alone%20and%20in%20combination%20with%20grapefruit%20juice%20on%20hepatic%20drug-metabolising%20enzymes%20and%20biochemical%20aspects%20in%20experimental%20Schistosoma%20mansoni&author=NM%20El-Lakkany&author=SH%20Seif%20el-Din&author=AA%20Badawy&author=FA%20Ebeid&volume=34&publication_year=2004&pages=1405-1412&pmid=15542101&doi=10.1016/j.ijpara.2004.08.012&)\]
20.  Evans CJ, Banerjee U. Transcriptional regulation of hematopoiesis in Drosophila. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2003;30:223–228. doi: 10.1016/S1079-9796(03)00028-7. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1079-9796\(03\)00028-7)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12732186/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Blood%20Cells%20Mol%20Dis&title=Transcriptional%20regulation%20of%20hematopoiesis%20in%20Drosophila&author=CJ%20Evans&author=U%20Banerjee&volume=30&publication_year=2003&pages=223-228&pmid=12732186&doi=10.1016/S1079-9796\(03\)00028-7&)\]
21.  Evans CJ, Hartenstein V, Banerjee U. Thicker than blood: conserved mechanisms in Drosophila and vertebrate hematopoiesis. Dev Cell. 2003;5:673–690. doi: 10.1016/S1534-5807(03)00335-6. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1534-5807\(03\)00335-6)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14602069/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Dev%20Cell&title=Thicker%20than%20blood:%20conserved%20mechanisms%20in%20Drosophila%20and%20vertebrate%20hematopoiesis&author=CJ%20Evans&author=V%20Hartenstein&author=U%20Banerjee&volume=5&publication_year=2003&pages=673-690&pmid=14602069&doi=10.1016/S1534-5807\(03\)00335-6&)\]
22.  Finn RD, McLaughlin LA, Ronseaux S, Rosewell I, Houston JB, Henderson CJ, Wolf CR. Defining the in vivo role for cytochrome b5 in cytochrome P450 function through the conditional hepatic deletion of microsomal cytochrome b5. J Biol Chem. 2008;283:31385–31393. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803496200. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M803496200)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2581580/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18805792/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Biol%20Chem&title=Defining%20the%20in%20vivo%20role%20for%20cytochrome%20b5%20in%20cytochrome%20P450%20function%20through%20the%20conditional%20hepatic%20deletion%20of%20microsomal%20cytochrome%20b5&author=RD%20Finn&author=LA%20McLaughlin&author=S%20Ronseaux&author=I%20Rosewell&author=JB%20Houston&volume=283&publication_year=2008&pages=31385-31393&pmid=18805792&doi=10.1074/jbc.M803496200&)\]
23.  Gateff E. Tumor-suppressor genes, hematopoietic malignancies and other hematopoietic disorders of Drosophilamelanogaster. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1994;712:260–279. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1994.tb33578.x. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-6632.1994.tb33578.x)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8192334/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Ann%20N%20Y%20Acad%20Sci&title=Tumor-suppressor%20genes,%20hematopoietic%20malignancies%20and%20other%20hematopoietic%20disorders%20of%20Drosophilamelanogaster&author=E%20Gateff&volume=712&publication_year=1994&pages=260-279&pmid=8192334&doi=10.1111/j.1749-6632.1994.tb33578.x&)\]
24.  Gilbert LI. Halloween genes encode P450 enzymes that mediate steroid hormone biosynthesis in Drosophilamelanogaster. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2004;215:1–10. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2003.11.003. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mce.2003.11.003)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15026169/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol%20Cell%20Endocrinol&title=Halloween%20genes%20encode%20P450%20enzymes%20that%20mediate%20steroid%20hormone%20biosynthesis%20in%20Drosophilamelanogaster&author=LI%20Gilbert&volume=215&publication_year=2004&pages=1-10&pmid=15026169&doi=10.1016/j.mce.2003.11.003&)\]
25.  Giordano SJ, Kaftory A, Steggles AW. A splicing mutation in the cytochrome b5 gene from a patient with congenital methemoglobinemia and pseudohermaphrodism. Hum Genet. 1994;93:568–570. doi: 10.1007/BF00202825. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00202825)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8168836/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Hum%20Genet&title=A%20splicing%20mutation%20in%20the%20cytochrome%20b5%20gene%20from%20a%20patient%20with%20congenital%20methemoglobinemia%20and%20pseudohermaphrodism&author=SJ%20Giordano&author=A%20Kaftory&author=AW%20Steggles&volume=93&publication_year=1994&pages=568-570&pmid=8168836&doi=10.1007/BF00202825&)\]
26.  Gupta A, Vij G, Sharma S, Tirkey N, Rishi P, Chopra K. Curcumin, a polyphenolic antioxidant, attenuates chronic fatigue syndrome in murine water immersion stress model. Immunobiology. 2009;214:33–39. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2008.04.003. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.imbio.2008.04.003)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19159825/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Immunobiology&title=Curcumin,%20a%20polyphenolic%20antioxidant,%20attenuates%20chronic%20fatigue%20syndrome%20in%20murine%20water%20immersion%20stress%20model&author=A%20Gupta&author=G%20Vij&author=S%20Sharma&author=N%20Tirkey&author=P%20Rishi&volume=214&publication_year=2009&pages=33-39&pmid=19159825&doi=10.1016/j.imbio.2008.04.003&)\]
27.  Hegesh E, Hegesh J, Kaftory A. Congenital methemoglobinemia with a deficiency of cytochrome b5. N Engl J Med. 1986;314:757–761. doi: 10.1056/NEJM198603203141206. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJM198603203141206)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/3951505/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=N%20Engl%20J%20Med&title=Congenital%20methemoglobinemia%20with%20a%20deficiency%20of%20cytochrome%20b5&author=E%20Hegesh&author=J%20Hegesh&author=A%20Kaftory&volume=314&publication_year=1986&pages=757-761&pmid=3951505&doi=10.1056/NEJM198603203141206&)\]
28.  Huppert FA, Solomou W, O’Connor S, Morgan K, Sussams P, Brayne C. Aging and lymphocyte subpopulations: whole-blood analysis of immune markers in a large population sample of healthy elderly individuals. Exp Gerontol. 1998;33:593–600. doi: 10.1016/S0531-5565(98)00033-3. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0531-5565\(98\)00033-3)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9789736/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Exp%20Gerontol&title=Aging%20and%20lymphocyte%20subpopulations:%20whole-blood%20analysis%20of%20immune%20markers%20in%20a%20large%20population%20sample%20of%20healthy%20elderly%20individuals&author=FA%20Huppert&author=W%20Solomou&author=S%20O%E2%80%99Connor&author=K%20Morgan&author=P%20Sussams&volume=33&publication_year=1998&pages=593-600&pmid=9789736&doi=10.1016/S0531-5565\(98\)00033-3&)\]
29.  Jagetia GC, Aggarwal BB. “Spicing up” of the immune system by curcumin. J Clin Immunol. 2007;27:19–35. doi: 10.1007/s10875-006-9066-7. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10875-006-9066-7)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17211725/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Immunol&title=%E2%80%9CSpicing%20up%E2%80%9D%20of%20the%20immune%20system%20by%20curcumin&author=GC%20Jagetia&author=BB%20Aggarwal&volume=27&publication_year=2007&pages=19-35&pmid=17211725&doi=10.1007/s10875-006-9066-7&)\]
30.  Juvonen RO, Iwasaki M, Negishi M. Roles of residues 129 and 209 in the alteration by cytochrome b5 of hydroxylase activities in mouse 2A P450S. Biochemistry. 1992;31:11519–11523. doi: 10.1021/bi00161a033. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi00161a033)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1445886/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Biochemistry&title=Roles%20of%20residues%20129%20and%20209%20in%20the%20alteration%20by%20cytochrome%20b5%20of%20hydroxylase%20activities%20in%20mouse%202A%20P450S&author=RO%20Juvonen&author=M%20Iwasaki&author=M%20Negishi&volume=31&publication_year=1992&pages=11519-11523&pmid=1445886&doi=10.1021/bi00161a033&)\]
31.  Kimbrell DA, Beutler B. The evolution and genetics of innate immunity. Nat Rev Genet. 2001;2:256–267. doi: 10.1038/35066006. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/35066006)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11283698/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Rev%20Genet&title=The%20evolution%20and%20genetics%20of%20innate%20immunity&author=DA%20Kimbrell&author=B%20Beutler&volume=2&publication_year=2001&pages=256-267&pmid=11283698&doi=10.1038/35066006&)\]
32.  Kimbrell DA, Hice C, Bolduc C, Kleinhesselink K, Beckingham K. The Dorothy enhancer has Tinman binding sites and drives hopscotch-induced tumor formation. Genesis. 2002;34:23–28. doi: 10.1002/gene.10134. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/gene.10134)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12324942/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genesis&title=The%20Dorothy%20enhancer%20has%20Tinman%20binding%20sites%20and%20drives%20hopscotch-induced%20tumor%20formation&author=DA%20Kimbrell&author=C%20Hice&author=C%20Bolduc&author=K%20Kleinhesselink&author=K%20Beckingham&volume=34&publication_year=2002&pages=23-28&pmid=12324942&doi=10.1002/gene.10134&)\]
33.  Kornbluth S, White K. Apoptosis in Drosophila: neither fish nor fowl (nor man, nor worm) J Cell Sci. 2005;118:1779–1787. doi: 10.1242/jcs.02377. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.02377)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15860727/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Cell%20Sci&title=Apoptosis%20in%20Drosophila:%20neither%20fish%20nor%20fowl%20\(nor%20man,%20nor%20worm\)&author=S%20Kornbluth&author=K%20White&volume=118&publication_year=2005&pages=1779-1787&pmid=15860727&doi=10.1242/jcs.02377&)\]
34.  Kurian JR, Longlais BJ, Trepanier LA. Discovery and characterization of a cytochrome b5 variant in humans with impaired hydroxylamine reduction capacity. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2007;17:597–603. doi: 10.1097/FPC.0b013e328011aaff. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1097/FPC.0b013e328011aaff)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17622936/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacogenet%20Genomics&title=Discovery%20and%20characterization%20of%20a%20cytochrome%20b5%20variant%20in%20humans%20with%20impaired%20hydroxylamine%20reduction%20capacity&author=JR%20Kurian&author=BJ%20Longlais&author=LA%20Trepanier&volume=17&publication_year=2007&pages=597-603&pmid=17622936&doi=10.1097/FPC.0b013e328011aaff&)\]
35.  Kwon KH, Barve A, Yu S, Huang MT, Kong AN. Cancer chemoprevention by phytochemicals: potential molecular targets, biomarkers and animal models. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2007;28:1409–1421. doi: 10.1111/j.1745-7254.2007.00694.x. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-7254.2007.00694.x)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17723174/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Acta%20Pharmacol%20Sin&title=Cancer%20chemoprevention%20by%20phytochemicals:%20potential%20molecular%20targets,%20biomarkers%20and%20animal%20models&author=KH%20Kwon&author=A%20Barve&author=S%20Yu&author=MT%20Huang&author=AN%20Kong&volume=28&publication_year=2007&pages=1409-1421&pmid=17723174&doi=10.1111/j.1745-7254.2007.00694.x&)\]
36.  Lemaitre B, Hoffmann J. The host defense of Drosophilamelanogaster. Annu Rev Immunol. 2007;25:697–743. doi: 10.1146/annurev.immunol.25.022106.141615. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.immunol.25.022106.141615)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17201680/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Annu%20Rev%20Immunol&title=The%20host%20defense%20of%20Drosophilamelanogaster&author=B%20Lemaitre&author=J%20Hoffmann&volume=25&publication_year=2007&pages=697-743&pmid=17201680&doi=10.1146/annurev.immunol.25.022106.141615&)\]
37.  Li WX. Canonical and non-canonical JAK-STAT signaling. Trends Cell Biol. 2008;18:545–551. doi: 10.1016/j.tcb.2008.08.008. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcb.2008.08.008)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3082280/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18848449/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Trends%20Cell%20Biol&title=Canonical%20and%20non-canonical%20JAK-STAT%20signaling&author=WX%20Li&volume=18&publication_year=2008&pages=545-551&pmid=18848449&doi=10.1016/j.tcb.2008.08.008&)\]
38.  Lin Z, Lou Y, Peacock J, Squires EJ. A novel polymorphism in the 5′ untranslated region of the porcine cytochrome b5 (CYB5) gene is associated with decreased fat androstenone level. Mamm Genome. 2005;16:367–373. doi: 10.1007/s00335-004-2439-4. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00335-004-2439-4)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16104384/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mamm%20Genome&title=A%20novel%20polymorphism%20in%20the%205%E2%80%B2%20untranslated%20region%20of%20the%20porcine%20cytochrome%20b5%20\(CYB5\)%20gene%20is%20associated%20with%20decreased%20fat%20androstenone%20level&author=Z%20Lin&author=Y%20Lou&author=J%20Peacock&author=EJ%20Squires&volume=16&publication_year=2005&pages=367-373&pmid=16104384&doi=10.1007/s00335-004-2439-4&)\]
39.  Locuson CW, Wienkers LC, Jones JP, Tracy TS. CYP2C9 protein interactions with cytochrome b(5): effects on the coupling of catalysis. Drug Metab Dispos. 2007;35:1174–1181. doi: 10.1124/dmd.107.014910. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1124/dmd.107.014910)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2386961/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17446262/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Drug%20Metab%20Dispos&title=CYP2C9%20protein%20interactions%20with%20cytochrome%20b\(5\):%20effects%20on%20the%20coupling%20of%20catalysis&author=CW%20Locuson&author=LC%20Wienkers&author=JP%20Jones&author=TS%20Tracy&volume=35&publication_year=2007&pages=1174-1181&pmid=17446262&doi=10.1124/dmd.107.014910&)\]
40.  Luo H, Hanratty WP, Dearolf CR. An amino acid substitution in the Drosophila hopTum-l Jak kinase causes leukemia-like hematopoietic defects. EMBO J. 1995;14:1412–1420. doi: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1995.tb07127.x. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1460-2075.1995.tb07127.x)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC398227/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7729418/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=EMBO%20J&title=An%20amino%20acid%20substitution%20in%20the%20Drosophila%20hopTum-l%20Jak%20kinase%20causes%20leukemia-like%20hematopoietic%20defects&author=H%20Luo&author=WP%20Hanratty&author=CR%20Dearolf&volume=14&publication_year=1995&pages=1412-1420&pmid=7729418&doi=10.1002/j.1460-2075.1995.tb07127.x&)\]
41.  Mandal L, Martinez-Agosto JA, Evans CJ, Hartenstein V, Banerjee U. A Hedgehog- and Antennapedia-dependent niche maintains Drosophila haematopoietic precursors. Nature. 2007;446:320–324. doi: 10.1038/nature05585. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature05585)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2807630/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17361183/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nature&title=A%20Hedgehog-%20and%20Antennapedia-dependent%20niche%20maintains%20Drosophila%20haematopoietic%20precursors&author=L%20Mandal&author=JA%20Martinez-Agosto&author=CJ%20Evans&author=V%20Hartenstein&author=U%20Banerjee&volume=446&publication_year=2007&pages=320-324&pmid=17361183&doi=10.1038/nature05585&)\]
42.  Markus R, Laurinyecz B, Kurucz E, Honti V, Bajusz I, Sipos B, Somogyi K, Kronhamn J, Hultmark D, Ando I. Sessile hemocytes as a hematopoietic compartment in Drosophilamelanogaster. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2009;106:4805–4809. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0801766106. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0801766106)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2660760/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19261847/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc%20Natl%20Acad%20Sci%20USA&title=Sessile%20hemocytes%20as%20a%20hematopoietic%20compartment%20in%20Drosophilamelanogaster&author=R%20Markus&author=B%20Laurinyecz&author=E%20Kurucz&author=V%20Honti&author=I%20Bajusz&volume=106&publication_year=2009&pages=4805-4809&pmid=19261847&doi=10.1073/pnas.0801766106&)\]
43.  Marriott I, Huet-Hudson YM. Sexual dimorphism in innate immune responses to infectious organisms. Immunol Res. 2006;34:177–192. doi: 10.1385/IR:34:3:177. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1385/IR:34:3:177)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16891670/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Immunol%20Res&title=Sexual%20dimorphism%20in%20innate%20immune%20responses%20to%20infectious%20organisms&author=I%20Marriott&author=YM%20Huet-Hudson&volume=34&publication_year=2006&pages=177-192&pmid=16891670&doi=10.1385/IR:34:3:177&)\]
44.  Means JC, Hays R. Mitochondrial membrane depolarization in Drosophila apoptosis. Cell Death Differ. 2007;14:383–385. doi: 10.1038/sj.cdd.4402036. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.cdd.4402036)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16977330/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell%20Death%20Differ&title=Mitochondrial%20membrane%20depolarization%20in%20Drosophila%20apoptosis&author=JC%20Means&author=R%20Hays&volume=14&publication_year=2007&pages=383-385&pmid=16977330&doi=10.1038/sj.cdd.4402036&)\]
45.  Meister M, Lagueux M. Drosophila blood cells. Cell Microbiol. 2003;5:573–580. doi: 10.1046/j.1462-5822.2003.00302.x. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1462-5822.2003.00302.x)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12925127/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell%20Microbiol&title=Drosophila%20blood%20cells&author=M%20Meister&author=M%20Lagueux&volume=5&publication_year=2003&pages=573-580&pmid=12925127&doi=10.1046/j.1462-5822.2003.00302.x&)\]
46.  Miller WL. Minireview: regulation of steroidogenesis by electron transfer. Endocrinology. 2005;146:2544–2550. doi: 10.1210/en.2005-0096. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1210/en.2005-0096)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15774560/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Endocrinology&title=Minireview:%20regulation%20of%20steroidogenesis%20by%20electron%20transfer&author=WL%20Miller&volume=146&publication_year=2005&pages=2544-2550&pmid=15774560&doi=10.1210/en.2005-0096&)\]
47.  Minakhina S, Steward R. Nuclear factor-kappa B pathways in Drosophila. Oncogene. 2006;25:6749–6757. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1209940. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1209940)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17072326/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Oncogene&title=Nuclear%20factor-kappa%20B%20pathways%20in%20Drosophila&author=S%20Minakhina&author=R%20Steward&volume=25&publication_year=2006&pages=6749-6757&pmid=17072326&doi=10.1038/sj.onc.1209940&)\]
48.  Minakhina S, Steward R. Melanotic mutants in Drosophila: pathways and phenotypes. Genetics. 2006;174:253–263. doi: 10.1534/genetics.106.061978. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.106.061978)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1569781/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16816412/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genetics&title=Melanotic%20mutants%20in%20Drosophila:%20pathways%20and%20phenotypes&author=S%20Minakhina&author=R%20Steward&volume=174&publication_year=2006&pages=253-263&pmid=16816412&doi=10.1534/genetics.106.061978&)\]
49.  Oberst A, Bender C, Green DR. Living with death: the evolution of the mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis in animals. Cell Death Differ. 2008;15:1139–1146. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2008.65. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/cdd.2008.65)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2612587/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18451868/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell%20Death%20Differ&title=Living%20with%20death:%20the%20evolution%20of%20the%20mitochondrial%20pathway%20of%20apoptosis%20in%20animals&author=A%20Oberst&author=C%20Bender&author=DR%20Green&volume=15&publication_year=2008&pages=1139-1146&pmid=18451868&doi=10.1038/cdd.2008.65&)\]
50.  Ow YP, Green DR, Hao Z, Mak TW. Cytochrome c: functions beyond respiration. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2008;9:532–542. doi: 10.1038/nrm2434. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm2434)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18568041/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Rev%20Mol%20Cell%20Biol&title=Cytochrome%20c:%20functions%20beyond%20respiration&author=YP%20Ow&author=DR%20Green&author=Z%20Hao&author=TW%20Mak&volume=9&publication_year=2008&pages=532-542&pmid=18568041&doi=10.1038/nrm2434&)\]
51.  Pili-Floury S, Leulier F, Takahashi K, Saigo K, Samain E, Ueda R, Lemaitre B. In vivo RNA interference analysis reveals an unexpected role for GNBP1 in the defense against Gram-positive bacterial infection in Drosophila adults. J Biol Chem. 2004;279:12848–12853. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M313324200. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M313324200)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14722090/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Biol%20Chem&title=In%20vivo%20RNA%20interference%20analysis%20reveals%20an%20unexpected%20role%20for%20GNBP1%20in%20the%20defense%20against%20Gram-positive%20bacterial%20infection%20in%20Drosophila%20adults&author=S%20Pili-Floury&author=F%20Leulier&author=K%20Takahashi&author=K%20Saigo&author=E%20Samain&volume=279&publication_year=2004&pages=12848-12853&pmid=14722090&doi=10.1074/jbc.M313324200&)\]
52.  Portoles MT, Diaz-Laviada I, Ainaga MJ, Pagani R, Municio AM. Involvement of cytochrome b5 in the cytotoxic response to Escherichia coli lipopolysaccharide. Mol Cell Biochem. 1989;87:79–84. doi: 10.1007/BF00421085. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00421085)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2671667/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol%20Cell%20Biochem&title=Involvement%20of%20cytochrome%20b5%20in%20the%20cytotoxic%20response%20to%20Escherichia%20coli%20lipopolysaccharide&author=MT%20Portoles&author=I%20Diaz-Laviada&author=MJ%20Ainaga&author=R%20Pagani&author=AM%20Municio&volume=87&publication_year=1989&pages=79-84&pmid=2671667&doi=10.1007/BF00421085&)\]
53.  Reichert T, DeBruyere M, Deneys V, Totterman T, Lydyard P, Yuksel F, Chapel H, Jewell D, Van Hove L, Linden J. Lymphocyte subset reference ranges in adult Caucasians. Clin Immunol Immunopathol. 1991;60:190–208. doi: 10.1016/0090-1229(91)90063-G. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/0090-1229\(91\)90063-G)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1712687/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Immunol%20Immunopathol&title=Lymphocyte%20subset%20reference%20ranges%20in%20adult%20Caucasians&author=T%20Reichert&author=M%20DeBruyere&author=V%20Deneys&author=T%20Totterman&author=P%20Lydyard&volume=60&publication_year=1991&pages=190-208&pmid=1712687&doi=10.1016/0090-1229\(91\)90063-G&)\]
54.  Remillieux-Leschelle N, Santamaria P, Randsholt NB. Regulation of larval hematopoiesis in Drosophilamelanogaster: a role for the multi sex combs gene. Genetics. 2002;162:1259–1274. doi: 10.1093/genetics/162.3.1259. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/162.3.1259)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1462314/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12454071/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genetics&title=Regulation%20of%20larval%20hematopoiesis%20in%20Drosophilamelanogaster:%20a%20role%20for%20the%20multi%20sex%20combs%20gene&author=N%20Remillieux-Leschelle&author=P%20Santamaria&author=NB%20Randsholt&volume=162&publication_year=2002&pages=1259-1274&pmid=12454071&doi=10.1093/genetics/162.3.1259&)\]
55.  Rizki TM, Rizki RM. Blood cell surface changes in Drosophila mutants with melanotic tumors. Science. 1983;220:73–75. doi: 10.1126/science.6402819. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.6402819)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/6402819/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Science&title=Blood%20cell%20surface%20changes%20in%20Drosophila%20mutants%20with%20melanotic%20tumors&author=TM%20Rizki&author=RM%20Rizki&volume=220&publication_year=1983&pages=73-75&pmid=6402819&doi=10.1126/science.6402819&)\]
56.  Rodriguez A, Zhou Z, Tang ML, Meller S, Chen J, Bellen H, Kimbrell DA. Identification of immune system and response genes, and novel mutations causing melanotic tumor formation in Drosophilamelanogaster. Genetics. 1996;143:929–940. doi: 10.1093/genetics/143.2.929. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/143.2.929)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1207349/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8725239/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genetics&title=Identification%20of%20immune%20system%20and%20response%20genes,%20and%20novel%20mutations%20causing%20melanotic%20tumor%20formation%20in%20Drosophilamelanogaster&author=A%20Rodriguez&author=Z%20Zhou&author=ML%20Tang&author=S%20Meller&author=J%20Chen&volume=143&publication_year=1996&pages=929-940&pmid=8725239&doi=10.1093/genetics/143.2.929&)\]
57.  Sa G, Das T. Anti cancer effects of curcumin: cycle of life and death. Cell Div. 2008;3:14. doi: 10.1186/1747-1028-3-14. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/1747-1028-3-14)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2572158/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18834508/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell%20Div&title=Anti%20cancer%20effects%20of%20curcumin:%20cycle%20of%20life%20and%20death&author=G%20Sa&author=T%20Das&volume=3&publication_year=2008&pages=14&pmid=18834508&doi=10.1186/1747-1028-3-14&)\]
58.  Schenkman JB, Jansson I. Interactions between cytochrome P450 and cytochrome b5. Drug Metab Rev. 1999;31:351–364. doi: 10.1081/DMR-100101923. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1081/DMR-100101923)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10335440/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Drug%20Metab%20Rev&title=Interactions%20between%20cytochrome%20P450%20and%20cytochrome%20b5&author=JB%20Schenkman&author=I%20Jansson&volume=31&publication_year=1999&pages=351-364&pmid=10335440&doi=10.1081/DMR-100101923&)\]
59.  Schenkman JB, Jansson I. The many roles of cytochrome b5. Pharmacol Ther. 2003;97:139–152. doi: 10.1016/S0163-7258(02)00327-3. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0163-7258\(02\)00327-3)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12559387/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Pharmacol%20Ther&title=The%20many%20roles%20of%20cytochrome%20b5&author=JB%20Schenkman&author=I%20Jansson&volume=97&publication_year=2003&pages=139-152&pmid=12559387&doi=10.1016/S0163-7258\(02\)00327-3&)\]
60.  Shames RS. Gender differences in the development and function of the immune system. J Adolesc Health. 2002;30:59–70. doi: 10.1016/S1054-139X(01)00382-2. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1054-139X\(01\)00382-2)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11943576/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Adolesc%20Health&title=Gender%20differences%20in%20the%20development%20and%20function%20of%20the%20immune%20system&author=RS%20Shames&volume=30&publication_year=2002&pages=59-70&pmid=11943576&doi=10.1016/S1054-139X\(01\)00382-2&)\]
61.  Sheweita SA. Carcinogen-metabolizing enzymes and insecticides. J Environ Sci Health B. 2004;39:805–818. \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15620088/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Environ%20Sci%20Health%20B&title=Carcinogen-metabolizing%20enzymes%20and%20insecticides&author=SA%20Sheweita&volume=39&publication_year=2004&pages=805-818&pmid=15620088&)\]
62.  Shia AK, Glittenberg M, Thompson G, Weber AN, Reichhart JM, Ligoxygakis P. Toll-dependent antimicrobial responses in Drosophila larval fat body require Spatzle secreted by haemocytes. J Cell Sci. 2009;122:4505–4515. doi: 10.1242/jcs.049155. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.049155)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2787462/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19934223/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Cell%20Sci&title=Toll-dependent%20antimicrobial%20responses%20in%20Drosophila%20larval%20fat%20body%20require%20Spatzle%20secreted%20by%20haemocytes&author=AK%20Shia&author=M%20Glittenberg&author=G%20Thompson&author=AN%20Weber&author=JM%20Reichhart&volume=122&publication_year=2009&pages=4505-4515&pmid=19934223&doi=10.1242/jcs.049155&)\]
63.  Sinenko SA, Kim EK, Wynn R, Manfruelli P, Ando I, Wharton KA, Perrimon N, Mathey-Prevot B. Yantar, a conserved arginine-rich protein is involved in Drosophila hemocyte development. Dev Biol. 2004;273:48–62. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2004.05.022. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2004.05.022)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15302597/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Dev%20Biol&title=Yantar,%20a%20conserved%20arginine-rich%20protein%20is%20involved%20in%20Drosophila%20hemocyte%20development&author=SA%20Sinenko&author=EK%20Kim&author=R%20Wynn&author=P%20Manfruelli&author=I%20Ando&volume=273&publication_year=2004&pages=48-62&pmid=15302597&doi=10.1016/j.ydbio.2004.05.022&)\]
64.  Spradling AC, Stern D, Beaton A, Rhem EJ, Laverty T, Mozden N, Misra S, Rubin GM. The Berkeley Drosophila genome project gene disruption project: single P-element insertions mutating 25% of vital Drosophila genes. Genetics. 1999;153:135–177. doi: 10.1093/genetics/153.1.135. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/153.1.135)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1460730/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10471706/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genetics&title=The%20Berkeley%20Drosophila%20genome%20project%20gene%20disruption%20project:%20single%20P-element%20insertions%20mutating%2025%%20of%20vital%20Drosophila%20genes&author=AC%20Spradling&author=D%20Stern&author=A%20Beaton&author=EJ%20Rhem&author=T%20Laverty&volume=153&publication_year=1999&pages=135-177&pmid=10471706&doi=10.1093/genetics/153.1.135&)\]
65.  Stofanko M, Kwon SY, Badenhorst P. A misexpression screen to identify regulators of Drosophila larval hemocyte development. Genetics. 2008;180:253–267. doi: 10.1534/genetics.108.089094. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.108.089094)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2535679/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18757933/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genetics&title=A%20misexpression%20screen%20to%20identify%20regulators%20of%20Drosophila%20larval%20hemocyte%20development&author=M%20Stofanko&author=SY%20Kwon&author=P%20Badenhorst&volume=180&publication_year=2008&pages=253-267&pmid=18757933&doi=10.1534/genetics.108.089094&)\]
66.  Taylor K, Kimbrell DA. Host immune response and differential survival of the sexes in Drosophila. Fly (Austin) 2007;1:197–204. doi: 10.4161/fly.5082. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.4161/fly.5082)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18820477/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Fly%20\(Austin\)&title=Host%20immune%20response%20and%20differential%20survival%20of%20the%20sexes%20in%20Drosophila&author=K%20Taylor&author=DA%20Kimbrell&volume=1&publication_year=2007&pages=197-204&pmid=18820477&doi=10.4161/fly.5082&)\]
67.  Tepass U, Fessler LI, Aziz A, Hartenstein V. Embryonic origin of hemocytes and their relationship to cell death in Drosophila. Development. 1994;120:1829–1837. doi: 10.1242/dev.120.7.1829. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.120.7.1829)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7924990/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Development&title=Embryonic%20origin%20of%20hemocytes%20and%20their%20relationship%20to%20cell%20death%20in%20Drosophila&author=U%20Tepass&author=LI%20Fessler&author=A%20Aziz&author=V%20Hartenstein&volume=120&publication_year=1994&pages=1829-1837&pmid=7924990&doi=10.1242/dev.120.7.1829&)\]
68.  Tirouvanziam R, Davidson CJ, Lipsick JS, Herzenberg LA. Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) of Drosophila hemocytes reveals important functional similarities to mammalian leukocytes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2004;101:2912–2917. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0308734101. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0308734101)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC365719/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14976247/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc%20Natl%20Acad%20Sci%20USA&title=Fluorescence-activated%20cell%20sorting%20\(FACS\)%20of%20Drosophila%20hemocytes%20reveals%20important%20functional%20similarities%20to%20mammalian%20leukocytes&author=R%20Tirouvanziam&author=CJ%20Davidson&author=JS%20Lipsick&author=LA%20Herzenberg&volume=101&publication_year=2004&pages=2912-2917&pmid=14976247&doi=10.1073/pnas.0308734101&)\]
69.  Tweedie S, Flybase Consortium FlyBase: enhancing Drosophila gene ontology annotations. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009;37:D555–D559. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn788. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkn788)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2686450/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18948289/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nucleic%20Acids%20Res&title=FlyBase:%20enhancing%20Drosophila%20gene%20ontology%20annotations&author=S%20Tweedie&volume=37&publication_year=2009&pages=D555-D559&pmid=18948289&doi=10.1093/nar/gkn788&)\]
70.  Umbreit J. Methemoglobin—it’s not just blue: a concise review. Am J Hematol. 2007;82:134–144. doi: 10.1002/ajh.20738. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajh.20738)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16986127/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Hematol&title=Methemoglobin%E2%80%94it%E2%80%99s%20not%20just%20blue:%20a%20concise%20review&author=J%20Umbreit&volume=82&publication_year=2007&pages=134-144&pmid=16986127&doi=10.1002/ajh.20738&)\]
71.  Vass E, Nappi AJ. Developmental and immunological aspects of Drosophila-parasitoid relationships. J Parasitol. 2000;86:1259–1270. doi: 10.1645/0022-3395(2000)086\[1259:DAIAOD\]2.0.CO;2. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1645/0022-3395\(2000\)086%5B1259:DAIAOD%5D2.0.CO;2)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11191902/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Parasitol&title=Developmental%20and%20immunological%20aspects%20of%20Drosophila-parasitoid%20relationships&author=E%20Vass&author=AJ%20Nappi&volume=86&publication_year=2000&pages=1259-1270&pmid=11191902&doi=10.1645/0022-3395\(2000\)086%5B1259:DAIAOD%5D2.0.CO;2&)\]
72.  Wang L, Ligoxygakis P. Pathogen recognition and signalling in the Drosophila innate immune response. Immunobiology. 2006;211:251–261. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2006.01.001. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.imbio.2006.01.001)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16697918/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Immunobiology&title=Pathogen%20recognition%20and%20signalling%20in%20the%20Drosophila%20innate%20immune%20response&author=L%20Wang&author=P%20Ligoxygakis&volume=211&publication_year=2006&pages=251-261&pmid=16697918&doi=10.1016/j.imbio.2006.01.001&)\]
73.  Wang L, Cowley AB, Terzyan S, Zhang X, Benson DR. Comparison of cytochromes b5 from insects and vertebrates. Proteins. 2007;67:293–304. doi: 10.1002/prot.21250. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/prot.21250)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17299762/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proteins&title=Comparison%20of%20cytochromes%20b5%20from%20insects%20and%20vertebrates&author=L%20Wang&author=AB%20Cowley&author=S%20Terzyan&author=X%20Zhang&author=DR%20Benson&volume=67&publication_year=2007&pages=293-304&pmid=17299762&doi=10.1002/prot.21250&)\]
74.  Watson KL, Johnson TK, Denell RE. Lethal(1) aberrant immune response mutations leading to melanotic tumor formation in Drosophilamelanogaster. Dev Genet. 1991;12:173–187. doi: 10.1002/dvg.1020120302. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/dvg.1020120302)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1907895/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Dev%20Genet&title=Lethal\(1\)%20aberrant%20immune%20response%20mutations%20leading%20to%20melanotic%20tumor%20formation%20in%20Drosophilamelanogaster&author=KL%20Watson&author=TK%20Johnson&author=RE%20Denell&volume=12&publication_year=1991&pages=173-187&pmid=1907895&doi=10.1002/dvg.1020120302&)\]
75.  Watson KL, Konrad KD, Woods DF, Bryant PJ. Drosophila homolog of the human S6 ribosomal protein is required for tumor suppression in the hematopoietic system. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1992;89:11302–11306. doi: 10.1073/pnas.89.23.11302. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.89.23.11302)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC50538/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1454811/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc%20Natl%20Acad%20Sci%20USA&title=Drosophila%20homolog%20of%20the%20human%20S6%20ribosomal%20protein%20is%20required%20for%20tumor%20suppression%20in%20the%20hematopoietic%20system&author=KL%20Watson&author=KD%20Konrad&author=DF%20Woods&author=PJ%20Bryant&volume=89&publication_year=1992&pages=11302-11306&pmid=1454811&doi=10.1073/pnas.89.23.11302&)\]
76.  Wilson C, Pearson RK, Bellen HJ, O’Kane CJ, Grossniklaus U, Gehring WJ. P-element-mediated enhancer detection: an efficient method for isolating and characterizing developmentally regulated genes in Drosophila. Genes Dev. 1989;3:1301–1313. doi: 10.1101/gad.3.9.1301. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.3.9.1301)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2558051/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genes%20Dev&title=P-element-mediated%20enhancer%20detection:%20an%20efficient%20method%20for%20isolating%20and%20characterizing%20developmentally%20regulated%20genes%20in%20Drosophila&author=C%20Wilson&author=RK%20Pearson&author=HJ%20Bellen&author=CJ%20O%E2%80%99Kane&author=U%20Grossniklaus&volume=3&publication_year=1989&pages=1301-1313&pmid=2558051&doi=10.1101/gad.3.9.1301&)\]
77.  Wingender E. The Transfac project as an example of framework technology that supports the analysis of genomic regulation. Brief Bioinform. 2008;9:326–332. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbn016. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/bbn016)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18436575/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Brief%20Bioinform&title=The%20Transfac%20project%20as%20an%20example%20of%20framework%20technology%20that%20supports%20the%20analysis%20of%20genomic%20regulation&author=E%20Wingender&volume=9&publication_year=2008&pages=326-332&pmid=18436575&doi=10.1093/bib/bbn016&)\]
78.  Wu H, Arron JR. TRAF6, a molecular bridge spanning adaptive immunity, innate immunity and osteoimmunology. Bioessays. 2003;25:1096–1105. doi: 10.1002/bies.10352. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/bies.10352)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14579250/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bioessays&title=TRAF6,%20a%20molecular%20bridge%20spanning%20adaptive%20immunity,%20innate%20immunity%20and%20osteoimmunology&author=H%20Wu&author=JR%20Arron&volume=25&publication_year=2003&pages=1096-1105&pmid=14579250&doi=10.1002/bies.10352&)\]
79.  Yamaori S, Yamazaki H, Suzuki A, Yamada A, Tani H, Kamidate T, Fujita K, Kamataki T. Effects of cytochrome b(5) on drug oxidation activities of human cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3As: similarity of CYP3A5 with CYP3A4 but not CYP3A7. Biochem Pharmacol. 2003;66:2333–2340. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2003.08.004. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bcp.2003.08.004)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14637191/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Biochem%20Pharmacol&title=Effects%20of%20cytochrome%20b\(5\)%20on%20drug%20oxidation%20activities%20of%20human%20cytochrome%20P450%20\(CYP\)%203As:%20similarity%20of%20CYP3A5%20with%20CYP3A4%20but%20not%20CYP3A7&author=S%20Yamaori&author=H%20Yamazaki&author=A%20Suzuki&author=A%20Yamada&author=H%20Tani&volume=66&publication_year=2003&pages=2333-2340&pmid=14637191&doi=10.1016/j.bcp.2003.08.004&)\]
80.  Yamazaki H, Shimada T. Cytochrome P450 reconstitution systems. Methods Mol Biol. 2006;320:61–71. doi: 10.1385/1-59259-998-2:61. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1385/1-59259-998-2:61)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16719374/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Methods%20Mol%20Biol&title=Cytochrome%20P450%20reconstitution%20systems&author=H%20Yamazaki&author=T%20Shimada&volume=320&publication_year=2006&pages=61-71&pmid=16719374&doi=10.1385/1-59259-998-2:61&)\]
81.  Yamazaki H, Nakamura M, Komatsu T, Ohyama K, Hatanaka N, Asahi S, Shimada N, Guengerich FP, Shimada T, Nakajima M, Yokoi T. Roles of NADPH-P450 reductase and apo- and holo-cytochrome b5 on xenobiotic oxidations catalyzed by 12 recombinant human cytochrome P450s expressed in membranes of Escherichia coli. Protein Expr Purif. 2002;24:329–337. doi: 10.1006/prep.2001.1578. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1006/prep.2001.1578)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11922748/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Protein%20Expr%20Purif&title=Roles%20of%20NADPH-P450%20reductase%20and%20apo-%20and%20holo-cytochrome%20b5%20on%20xenobiotic%20oxidations%20catalyzed%20by%2012%20recombinant%20human%20cytochrome%20P450s%20expressed%20in%20membranes%20of%20Escherichia%20coli&author=H%20Yamazaki&author=M%20Nakamura&author=T%20Komatsu&author=K%20Ohyama&author=N%20Hatanaka&volume=24&publication_year=2002&pages=329-337&pmid=11922748&doi=10.1006/prep.2001.1578&)\]
82.  Ye YH, Chenoweth SF, McGraw EA. Effective but costly, evolved mechanisms of defense against a virulent opportunistic pathogen in Drosophilamelanogaster. PLoS Pathog. 2009;5:e1000385. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000385. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1000385)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2663048/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19381251/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20Pathog&title=Effective%20but%20costly,%20evolved%20mechanisms%20of%20defense%20against%20a%20virulent%20opportunistic%20pathogen%20in%20Drosophilamelanogaster&author=YH%20Ye&author=SF%20Chenoweth&author=EA%20McGraw&volume=5&publication_year=2009&pages=e1000385&pmid=19381251&doi=10.1371/journal.ppat.1000385&)\]
83.  Zandman-Goddard G, Peeva E, Shoenfeld Y. Gender and autoimmunity. Autoimmun Rev. 2007;6:366–372. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2006.10.001. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2006.10.001)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17537382/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Autoimmun%20Rev&title=Gender%20and%20autoimmunity&author=G%20Zandman-Goddard&author=E%20Peeva&author=Y%20Shoenfeld&volume=6&publication_year=2007&pages=366-372&pmid=17537382&doi=10.1016/j.autrev.2006.10.001&)\]
84.  Zettervall CJ, Anderl I, Williams MJ, Palmer R, Kurucz E, Ando I, Hultmark D. A directed screen for genes involved in Drosophila blood cell activation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2004;101:14192–14197. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0403789101. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0403789101)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC521135/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15381778/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc%20Natl%20Acad%20Sci%20USA&title=A%20directed%20screen%20for%20genes%20involved%20in%20Drosophila%20blood%20cell%20activation&author=CJ%20Zettervall&author=I%20Anderl&author=MJ%20Williams&author=R%20Palmer&author=E%20Kurucz&volume=101&publication_year=2004&pages=14192-14197&pmid=15381778&doi=10.1073/pnas.0403789101&)\]