---
title: "Spaceflight increases sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ leak and this cannot be counteracted with BuOE treatment"
authors: ["Jessica L Braun", "Val A Fajardo"]
journal: "NPJ Microgravity"
date: "2024 Jul 19"
doi: "10.1038/s41526-024-00419-y"
source_url: "https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11271499/"
---

# Spaceflight increases sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ leak and this cannot be counteracted with BuOE treatment

*NPJ Microgravity*, 2024 Jul 19, [doi:10.1038/s41526-024-00419-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-024-00419-y)

### Jessica L Braun
### Val A Fajardo

## Abstract

Spending time in a microgravity environment is known to cause significant skeletal muscle atrophy and weakness via muscle unloading, which can be partly attributed to Ca2+ dysregulation. The sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum Ca2+ ATPase (SERCA) pump is responsible for bringing Ca2+ from the cytosol into its storage site, the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR), at the expense of ATP. We have recently demonstrated that, in the soleus of space-flown mice, the Ca2+ uptake ability of the SERCA pump is severely impaired and this may be attributed to increases in reactive oxygen/nitrogen species (RONS), to which SERCA is highly susceptible. The purpose of this study was therefore to investigate whether treatment with the antioxidant, Manganese(III) _meso_\-tetrakis(_N_\-n-butoxyethylpyridinium-2-yl)porphyrin, MnTnBuOE-2-PyP5+ (BuOE), could attenuate muscle atrophy and SERCA dysfunction. We received soleus muscles from the rodent research 18 mission which had male mice housed on the international space station for 35 days and treated with either saline or BuOE. Spaceflight significantly reduced the soleus:body mass ratio and significantly increased SERCA’s ionophore ratio, a measure of SR Ca2+ leak, and 4-HNE content (marker of RONS), none of which could be rescued by BuOE treatment. In conclusion, we find that spaceflight induces significant soleus muscle atrophy and SR Ca2+ leak that cannot be counteracted with BuOE treatment. Future work should investigate alternative therapeutics that are specifically aimed at increasing SERCA activation or reducing Ca2+ leak.

**Subject terms:** Calcium channels, Physiology

* * *

Exposure to microgravity, and subsequent muscle unloading, is known to cause extensive muscle weakness and atrophy, especially to postural muscles such as the soleus[1](#CR1)–[6](#CR6). Recent work has demonstrated that muscle weakness precedes muscle atrophy[4](#CR4) and was thought to be due, at least in part, to Ca2+ dysregulation[7](#CR7). Using soleus muscle samples from the rodent research (RR) -1 and -9 missions, we demonstrated the Ca2+ uptake ability of the sarco (endo)plasmic reticulum Ca2+ ATPase (SERCA) pump to be severely impaired following ~1 month of spaceflight[5](#CR5). In muscle, SERCA is responsible for maintaining low intracellular Ca2+ concentrations (\[Ca2+\]i) by bringing Ca2+ from the cytosol into its storage site, the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR)[8](#CR8),[9](#CR9). Impaired SERCA function can result in high \[Ca2+\]i, leading to elevated RONS, increased protein degradation, cell death, and muscle weakness and atrophy[10](#CR10)–[14](#CR14). Structurally, SERCA pumps are highly susceptible to post-translational modifications (e.g., tyrosine nitration, cysteine nitrosylation) from elevated RONS that will impair its catalytic activity [5](#CR5),[15](#CR15)–[22](#CR22). The ensuing elevated \[Ca2+\]i will not only lead to muscle damage but can also further increase RONS production[23](#CR23)–[25](#CR25) creating a negative cyclic relationship that perpetuates muscle pathology.

While damaging at high concentrations, RONS are important signaling molecules at low concentrations[26](#CR26). Superoxide dismutases (SOD) are a family of enzymes that maintain physiological RONS concentrations by scavenging and neutralizing highly reactive superoxide molecules (for review, see ref. [27](#CR27)). Mice deficient of SOD show impaired SERCA activity, muscle weakness, and atrophy[11](#CR11),[20](#CR20),[22](#CR22); but, the pharmacological activation of SERCA can reduce mitochondrial RONS production and attenuate muscle atrophy despite increased oxidative stress[11](#CR11),[12](#CR12). Thus, targeting SERCA, either through genetic overexpression or pharmacological intervention, may be a viable target to attenuate muscle atrophy and weakness. The purpose of this study was therefore to investigate whether treatment with Manganese(III) _meso_\-tetrakis(_N_\-n-butoxyethylpyridinium-2-yl)porphyrin, MnTnBuOE-2-PyP5+ (BuOE, also seen as BMX-001), an antioxidant that acts as a SOD mimetic[28](#CR28),[29](#CR29), could attenuate muscle atrophy and SERCA dysfunction in the murine soleus muscle following 35 days of spaceflight. BuOE has been effective in reducing oxidative stress in various animal models of radiation-induced injury[30](#CR30)–[33](#CR33), a relevant injury mechanism to spaceflight, providing strong rationale for the investigation of its effectiveness in the present study.

Following 35 days of exposure to microgravity, absolute soleus weight was significantly reduced in the flight groups compared to GC/VIV groups (_p_ = 0.0005) with no effect of BuOE treatment (Fig. [1A](#Fig1)). No effects of flight or treatment were observed on body weight (Fig. [1B](#Fig1)) resulting in a main effect of flight reducing the soleus:body weight ratio (_p_ = 0.0053, Fig. [1C](#Fig1)).

Ionophore supported Ca2+\-dependent SERCA ATPase activity was assessed across a range of \[Ca2+\] (_p_Ca 7.0–5.0) and was presented as percentage of maximal activity (Fig. [2A](#Fig2)) to assess the _p_Ca50 (i.e., \[Ca2+\] required to elicit ½ maximal activity) as a measure of SERCA’s apparent affinity for Ca2+. There was no effect of spaceflight or BuOE treatment on maximal SERCA ATPase activity (Fig. [2B](#Fig2)), but a main effect of BuOE treatment increasing SERCA’s apparent affinity for Ca2+ was detected (_p_ = 0.0323, Fig. [2C](#Fig2)). In dividing the maximal ATPase rates with ionophore (no Ca2+ gradient) by the rates without ionophore (Ca2+ gradient), a measure of SR Ca2+ permeability and leak can be obtained[34](#CR34)–[36](#CR36). In doing this, we observed a main effect of flight reducing the ionophore ratio (_p_ = 0.0255, Fig. [2D](#Fig2)), indicative of increased SR Ca2+ leak.

Western blotting revealed significant increases in SERCA1a (_p_ = 0.0039) and SERCA2a (_p_ = 0.0107) protein content in the spaceflight groups compared to GC/VIV with no effect of BuOE treatment (Fig. [2E](#Fig2)). Total and phosphorylated content of the Ca2+ release protein, RYR, was also investigated with no effects on total RYR, but increases in p-RYR (increases Ca2+ release) in flight groups compared to GC/VIV, though this did not reach statistical significance (_p_ = 0.0905, Fig. [2E](#Fig2)).

4-HNE is a product of lipid peroxidation due to increased RONS and therefore serves as a marker of oxidative stress[37](#CR37). Significant increases in 4-HNE were observed in flight groups compared to GC/VIV (_p_ = 0.0387) with no effect of BuOE treatment (Fig. [3A](#Fig3)). Further, total SOD content was reduced in flight groups compared to controls, though this did not reach statistical significance (_p_ = 0.0510, Fig. [3A](#Fig3)). Investigating protein content of the three SERCA regulators demonstrated dynamic changes in response to spaceflight. Significant reductions in SLN (_p_ = 0.0080), increases in NNAT (_p_ = 0.0158), and reductions in PLN approaching statistical significance (_p_ = 0.0828) were all observed in the space-flown soleus compared to GC/VIV (Fig. [3B](#Fig3)).

To extend our previous work demonstrating that soleus SERCA Ca2+ uptake is impaired following spaceflight, which we attributed to increased RONS content[5](#CR5), we investigated whether treatment with the antioxidant, BuOE, could attenuate muscle atrophy and SERCA dysfunction following spaceflight. We found BuOE was unable to attenuate soleus muscle atrophy following 35 days in space. While BuOE treatment increased SERCA’s affinity for Ca2+ in both the GC/VIV and flight groups, it was unable to rescue the significant increases in 4-HNE content or SR Ca2+ leak, measured using an ionophore ratio, induced by microgravity exposure. Consistent with previous work[5](#CR5), we observed increases in protein content of both SERCA isoforms following spaceflight as well as increases in oxidative stress and dynamic changes in the expression of the three SERCA regulators, SLN, NNAT, and PLN. Spaceflight also tended to reduce SOD content and increase p-RYR, both of which may be contributing to increased SR Ca2+ leak.

Past literature using both ground-based and spaceflight models in rodents and humans has begun to suggest that Ca2+ dysregulation in skeletal muscle may be an early step in the pathogenesis of weakness and atrophy[4](#CR4),[5](#CR5),[38](#CR38). Specifically, we have previously shown the Ca2+ uptake ability of SERCA to be impaired following spaceflight which we attributed, at least partially, to increases in total protein RONS[5](#CR5). SERCA pumps have highly susceptible tyrosine residues that, in the presence of increased RONS, can result in tyrosine nitration[15](#CR15)–[18](#CR18). Tyrosine 294 and 295 of SERCA appear to be most vulnerable to tyrosine nitration and reside in the transmembrane domain of the pump, a necessary domain for Ca2+ translocation[16](#CR16). The structural changes that ensue following tyrosine nitration of these residues result in impaired catalytic activity and increased \[Ca2+\]i. Here, we investigated ATPase activity of the SERCA pump and found no changes in response to microgravity; though, we do observe a main effect of BuOE treatment increasing SERCA’s affinity for Ca2+. This is consistent with our previous work showing that heterozygous deletion of SOD2 reduces SERCA’s affinity for Ca2+[20](#CR20). The increases in both SERCA isoforms with spaceflight are consistent with our previous work[5](#CR5) and were similarly unable to attenuate spaceflight-induced increases in \[Ca2+\]i. Given that SERCA density is the primary determinant of Ca2+ uptake[39](#CR39) the increased protein content should increase SERCA catalytic activity; however, this was not detected, suggesting protein dysfunction or a failed compensatory response. The mechanism underlying increased SERCA protein expression following spaceflight requires further investigation but has been observed in other muscle-wasting diseases and myopathies[21](#CR21),[40](#CR40),[41](#CR41). SLN and PLN act to reduce SERCA-mediated Ca2+ uptake through reductions in affinity as well as inducing Ca2+ slippage[42](#CR42)–[44](#CR44); however, no effects of BuOE were detected on the protein expression of SLN, NNAT, or PLN with the only changes being observed with spaceflight. With regards to the SERCA regulators, inconsistencies were observed with the previous RR-9 mission where there was a clear increase in SLN and decrease in NNAT following spaceflight[5](#CR5); but, RR-18 shows the opposite with reductions in SLN and increases in NNAT, which is maintained even when loaded on the same gel (Supplemental Fig. [1A, B](#MOESM1)). At present, we can only speculate that possible differences in reloading time (~20 h for RR-18[45](#CR45) and ~38 h for RR-9[46](#CR46)) would lead to altered expression patterns, but this warrants further investigation.

It has been well established that Ca2+ accumulates in the cytosol of muscle fibers following unloading[7](#CR7),[47](#CR47)–[51](#CR51) and we also contribute to the growing literature on Ca2+ dysregulation by demonstrating that SR Ca2+ leak is significantly increased in the murine soleus following microgravity exposure, consistent with what has been reported with hindlimb suspension[52](#CR52). Increased SR Ca2+ leak has been observed in various muscle pathologies, many of which are related to post-translational modifications of RYR and its regulators[53](#CR53)–[56](#CR56). Here, we observed increases in phosphorylated RYR, albeit non-statistically significant, that may still be contributing to increased Ca2+ leak. Notably, previous work has demonstrated that blocking L-type Ca2+ channels attenuates unloading-induced Ca2+ overload in the rat soleus[57](#CR57). In addition to alterations to RYR, the lipid composition of the SR membrane can also drastically alter Ca2+ handling[34](#CR34),[58](#CR58),[59](#CR59). More specifically, it has been shown that increased lipid peroxidation will increase membrane permeability[60](#CR60)–[62](#CR62) and with significant increases in 4-HNE, a product of lipid peroxidation[37](#CR37), in the space-flown soleus, it is likely that alterations to SR permeability are contributing to increased Ca2+ leak, though more targeted studies are required. As well as SR Ca2+ leak, there are several other mechanisms that can lead to elevations in \[Ca2+\]i that were not explored in the present study. One such mechanism is early muscle membrane depolarization, due to reduced Na+/K+\-ATPase pump activity[63](#CR63),[64](#CR64), possibly triggering the opening of the voltage-sensitive dihydropyridine receptors and increasing \[Ca2+\]i. Ca2+ overload may also be a product of store-operated Ca2+ entry - the process of Ca2+ influx triggered by reductions in SR luminal \[Ca2+\] (for review, see ref. [65](#CR65)), which could be triggered by SERCA dysfunction. This phenomenon has been identified to contribute to Ca2+ overload in dystrophic muscle[66](#CR66),[67](#CR67) and various other myopathies[68](#CR68), though its contributions to muscle atrophy and weakness following unloading remain to be explored.

In skeletal muscle, BuOE was unable to attenuate the increases in 4-HNE caused by spaceflight; but, was effective in reducing 4-HNE in the retina from the same mice[45](#CR45), indicative of tissue-specific responses to BuOE at the dose provided in this study. Though speculative, it is possible that BuOE was unable to compensate for the reductions in SOD content observed following spaceflight, an effect also seen in astronaut muscle following spaceflight, albeit in hair samples[69](#CR69). Future studies focused on skeletal muscle, namely SERCA function in the soleus, may benefit from higher doses of BuOE treatment or other modes of cytotoxic protection. For example, HSP70 can protect SERCA from oxidant damage in conditions of muscular dystrophy[70](#CR70), and it would be of interest to determine whether pharmacological induction or genetic overexpression of HSP70 could protect SERCA function in the context of spaceflight. While we were limited in our ability to measure the sources of RONS in this study, previous work has demonstrated mitochondrial dysfunction[71](#CR71),[72](#CR72), and increased NADPH oxidase expression and activity[73](#CR73),[74](#CR74) to contribute to RONS production with spaceflight and simulated microgravity exposure. Further investigation into whether targeting RONS production at the source can counteract muscle weakness and atrophy is needed. Regardless, targeting Ca2+ leak from the SR has shown to be beneficial to muscle health in aged mice[75](#CR75), hypoxia-induced atrophy in rodents[76](#CR76), and murine dystrophic muscle[77](#CR77) indicating that this may be a viable target for spaceflight-induced changes in SR permeability and leak. Importantly, a recent study by Sharlo, et al. [78](#CR78) treated rats with the SERCA activator, CDN1163, during hindlimb suspension (NASA’s simulated model of microgravity) and, while they didn’t measure SERCA function directly, they found improvements in several muscle parameters including soleus fatigue resistance, mitochondrial markers, and markers of Ca2+ homeostasis. This finding, along with others targeting SERCA activation in situations of muscle impairment[11](#CR11),[12](#CR12) demonstrate the importance of directly targeting SERCA in space.

We observe some discrepancies related to SLN expression following spaceflight between the RR-9[5](#CR5) and the present RR-18 study. SLN expression has been shown to upregulated in several muscle-wasting conditions, but whether this upregulation is beneficial or detrimental to muscle is still under debate (for review, see ref. [79](#CR79)). Procedurally, the RR-1, RR-9, and RR-18 studies all maintained mouse strain and housing temperature but disparities in reloading time prior to euthanasia (RR-9, ~38 h[46](#CR46); RR-18, ~20 h[45](#CR45)) may contribute to the differences in SLN expression between missions. This hypothesis remains speculative but would be an interesting avenue of investigation in the future. Finally, due to limitations on the amount of sample, we were unable to investigate SERCA-specific analysis of RONS modifications which could provide insight into the changes in Ca2+ affinity observed here.

In summary, with soleus muscles from space-flown male mice, we investigated the effects of antioxidant treatment with BuOE on soleus muscle atrophy, SERCA ATPase function, and SR Ca2+ leak. We found spaceflight to induce soleus muscle atrophy and increases in SR Ca2+ leak that could not be overcome by BuOE treatment, despite increases in SERCA’s affinity for Ca2+. Future studies aimed at reducing Ca2+ leak or increasing SERCA activation could reveal SERCA and Ca2+ handling as viable targets to counteract weakness and atrophy observed with spaceflight.

## Methods

### Muscle samples

Soleus muscles were obtained from the NASA Biological Institutional Scientific Collection. Muscles came from male C57BL/6 J mice from the RR-18 mission which had two control groups, ground control (GC) and vivarium (VIV) control, as well as a flight group which had mice housed on the International Space Station for 35 days as previously described[5](#CR5),[45](#CR45),[80](#CR80)–[83](#CR83). All mice were treated weekly with either BuOE (1 mg/kg) or saline via subcutaneous injection beginning one week prior to launch and continuing for the duration of spaceflight. Upon live return to Earth, soleus muscles were dissected and stored in RNALater at −80 °C. Muscles were thawed, rinsed from RNALater, and homogenized in homogenizing buffer prior to further analysis[5](#CR5).

### SERCA activity assay and ionophore ratio

SERCA ATPase activity was assessed using an enzyme-linked spectrophotometric assay as previously described[19](#CR19). Full SERCA ATPase-_p_Ca curves were run in the presence of ionophore as well as in the absence of ionophore specifically at maximal stimulating Ca2+ concentrations (_p_Ca = 5.0) to gain a measure of SR Ca2+ leak and permeability as previously described[34](#CR34)–[36](#CR36). The Ca2+ ionophore, A23187 induces SR membrane permeability, which encourages maximal SERCA activity by preventing back inhibition. Thus, if the SR membrane is inherently ‘leaky’ then the calculated ionophore ratio (maximal SERCA activity in the presence of ionophore: maximal SERCA activity in the absence of ionophore) will be relatively smaller.

### Western blotting

Western blotting was performed on muscle homogenate to assess protein content for SERCA1a, SERCA2a, total and phosphorylated content of the Ca2+ release protein ryanodine receptor (RYR1/2), 4-hydroxynonenal (4-HNE) as a marker of oxidative stress, SOD, and the three SERCA regulators, sarcolipin (SLN), neuronatin (NNAT), and phospholamban (PLN) as previously described[5](#CR5),[19](#CR19). Specific methods for the aforementioned proteins are listed in Supplemental Table [1](#MOESM1).

### Statistical analysis

All data are presented as means ± standard error of the mean (SEM). No statistical differences were detected between the GC and VIV groups and so they were combined within their respective treatment groups to increase statistical power. A two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test was used to compare the main effects of GC/VIV vs flight and saline vs BuOE as well as any interaction that may exist. Statistical significance was set at _p_ ≤ 0.05 and outliers were detected and removed prior to analysis if they were ±2 standard deviations from the mean of their respective group. All statistical tests were employed using GraphPad Prism 9. _p_\-values are presented above graphs.

## Supplementary information

## Acknowledgements

We thank the NASA Life Sciences Data Archive Institutional Scientific Collection Biospecimen Sharing Program for the provision of samples and the NASA Ames Research Center team who worked on the RR-18 mission. This work was supported by a CIHR CGS-D award to J.L.B., a CRC Tier 2 Award, a Canadian Space Agency Grant, as well as an NSERC Discovery Grant to V.A.F.

## Author contributions

Conceptualization, J.L.B. and V.A.F.; methodology, J.L.B. and V.A.F.; validation, J.L.B. and V.A.F.; formal analysis, J.L.B. and V.A.F.; investigation, J.L.B.; resources, V.A.F.; data curation, J.L.B.; writing – original draft preparation, J.L.B.; writing – review and editing, J.L.B. and V.A.F.; visualization, J.L.B. and V.A.F.; supervision, V.A.F.; project administration, V.A.F.; funding acquisition, V.A.F. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

## Data availability

The data that support this study are available at the NASA Open Science Data Repository (10.26030/mx0n-ta73).

## Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

## Footnotes

**Publisher’s note** Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

## Supplementary information

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41526-024-00419-y.

## References

*   1.Sandona, D. et al. Adaptation of mouse skeletal muscle to long-term microgravity in the MDS mission. _PLoS ONE_**7**, e33232 (2012). 10.1371/journal.pone.0033232 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0033232)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3314659/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22470446/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Sandona,%20D.%20et%20al.%20Adaptation%20of%20mouse%20skeletal%20muscle%20to%20long-term%20microgravity%20in%20the%20MDS%20mission.%20PLoS%20ONE7,%20e33232%20\(2012\).%2010.1371/journal.pone.0033232)\]
*   2.Okada, R. et al. Transcriptome analysis of gravitational effects on mouse skeletal muscles under microgravity and artificial 1 g onboard environment. _Sci. Rep._**11**, 9168 (2021). 10.1038/s41598-021-88392-4 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-88392-4)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8080648/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33911096/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Okada,%20R.%20et%20al.%20Transcriptome%20analysis%20of%20gravitational%20effects%20on%20mouse%20skeletal%20muscles%20under%20microgravity%20and%20artificial%201%20g%20onboard%20environment.%20Sci.%20Rep.11,%209168%20\(2021\).%2010.1038/s41598-021-88392-4)\]
*   3.Widrick, J. J. et al. Effect of a 17 day spaceflight on contractile properties of human soleus muscle fibres. _J. Physiol._**516**, 915–930 (1999). 10.1111/j.1469-7793.1999.0915u.x \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7793.1999.0915u.x)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2269300/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10200437/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Widrick,%20J.%20J.%20et%20al.%20Effect%20of%20a%2017%20day%20spaceflight%20on%20contractile%20properties%20of%20human%20soleus%20muscle%20fibres.%20J.%20Physiol.516,%20915%E2%80%93930%20\(1999\).%2010.1111/j.1469-7793.1999.0915u.x)\]
*   4.Monti, E. et al. Neuromuscular junction instability and altered intracellular calcium handling as early determinants of force loss during unloading in humans. _J. Physiol._**599**, 3037–3061 (2021). 10.1113/JP281365 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1113/JP281365)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8359852/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33881176/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Monti,%20E.%20et%20al.%20Neuromuscular%20junction%20instability%20and%20altered%20intracellular%20calcium%20handling%20as%20early%20determinants%20of%20force%20loss%20during%20unloading%20in%20humans.%20J.%20Physiol.599,%203037%E2%80%933061%20\(2021\).%2010.1113/JP281365)\]
*   5.Braun, J. L., Geromella, M. S., Hamstra, S. I., Messner, H. N. & Fajardo, V. A. Characterizing SERCA function in murine skeletal muscles after 35–37 days of spaceflight. _Int. J. Mol. Sci._10.3390/ijms222111764 (2021). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms222111764)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8584217/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34769190/)\]
*   6.Baranowski, R. W. et al. Toward countering muscle and bone loss with spaceflight: GSK3 as a potential target. _iScience_**26**, 107047 (2023). 10.1016/j.isci.2023.107047 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2023.107047)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10285634/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37360691/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Baranowski,%20R.%20W.%20et%20al.%20Toward%20countering%20muscle%20and%20bone%20loss%20with%20spaceflight:%20GSK3%20as%20a%20potential%20target.%20iScience26,%20107047%20\(2023\).%2010.1016/j.isci.2023.107047)\]
*   7.Ingalls, C. P., Wenke, J. C. & Armstrong, R. B. Time course changes in \[Ca2+\]i, force, and protein content in hindlimb-suspended mouse soleus muscles. _Aviat. Space Environ. Med._**72**, 471–476 (2001). \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11346014/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Ingalls,%20C.%20P.,%20Wenke,%20J.%20C.%20&%20Armstrong,%20R.%20B.%20Time%20course%20changes%20in%20%5BCa2+%5Di,%20force,%20and%20protein%20content%20in%20hindlimb-suspended%20mouse%20soleus%20muscles.%20Aviat.%20Space%20Environ.%20Med.72,%20471%E2%80%93476%20\(2001\).)\]
*   8.Periasamy, M. & Huke, S. SERCA pump level is a critical determinant of Ca(2+)homeostasis and cardiac contractility. _J. Mol. Cell. Cardiol._**33**, 1053–1063 (2001). 10.1006/jmcc.2001.1366 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1006/jmcc.2001.1366)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11444913/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Periasamy,%20M.%20&%20Huke,%20S.%20SERCA%20pump%20level%20is%20a%20critical%20determinant%20of%20Ca\(2+\)homeostasis%20and%20cardiac%20contractility.%20J.%20Mol.%20Cell.%20Cardiol.33,%201053%E2%80%931063%20\(2001\).%2010.1006/jmcc.2001.1366)\]
*   9.Misquitta, C. M., Mack, D. P. & Grover, A. K. Sarco/endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ (SERCA)-pumps: link to heart beats and calcium waves. _Cell Calcium_**25**, 277–290 (1999). 10.1054/ceca.1999.0032 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1054/ceca.1999.0032)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10456225/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Misquitta,%20C.%20M.,%20Mack,%20D.%20P.%20&%20Grover,%20A.%20K.%20Sarco/endoplasmic%20reticulum%20Ca2+%20\(SERCA\)-pumps:%20link%20to%20heart%20beats%20and%20calcium%20waves.%20Cell%20Calcium25,%20277%E2%80%93290%20\(1999\).%2010.1054/ceca.1999.0032)\]
*   10.Eisner, V., Csordás, G. & Hajnóczky, G. Interactions between sarco-endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria in cardiac and skeletal muscle - pivotal roles in Ca²+ and reactive oxygen species signaling. _J. Cell Sci._**126**, 2965–2978 (2013). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.093609)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3711195/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23843617/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Eisner,%20V.,%20Csord%C3%A1s,%20G.%20&%20Hajn%C3%B3czky,%20G.%20Interactions%20between%20sarco-endoplasmic%20reticulum%20and%20mitochondria%20in%20cardiac%20and%20skeletal%20muscle%20-%20pivotal%20roles%20in%20Ca%C2%B2+%20and%20reactive%20oxygen%20species%20signaling.%20J.%20Cell%20Sci.126,%202965%E2%80%932978%20\(2013\).)\]
*   11.Qaisar, R. et al. Restoration of SERCA ATPase prevents oxidative stress-related muscle atrophy and weakness. _Redox Biol._**20**, 68–74 (2019). 10.1016/j.redox.2018.09.018 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.redox.2018.09.018)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6174848/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30296699/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Qaisar,%20R.%20et%20al.%20Restoration%20of%20SERCA%20ATPase%20prevents%20oxidative%20stress-related%20muscle%20atrophy%20and%20weakness.%20Redox%20Biol.20,%2068%E2%80%9374%20\(2019\).%2010.1016/j.redox.2018.09.018)\]
*   12.Qaisar, R. et al. Restoration of sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) ATPase (SERCA) activity prevents age-related muscle atrophy and weakness in mice. _Int. J. Mol. Sci._10.3390/ijms22010037 (2020). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22010037)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7792969/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33375170/)\]
*   13.Enns, D. L. & Belcastro, A. N. Early activation and redistribution of calpain activity in skeletal muscle during hindlimb unweighting and reweighting. _Can. J. Physiol. Pharm._**84**, 601–609 (2006). 10.1139/y06-013 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1139/y06-013)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16900244/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Enns,%20D.%20L.%20&%20Belcastro,%20A.%20N.%20Early%20activation%20and%20redistribution%20of%20calpain%20activity%20in%20skeletal%20muscle%20during%20hindlimb%20unweighting%20and%20reweighting.%20Can.%20J.%20Physiol.%20Pharm.84,%20601%E2%80%93609%20\(2006\).%2010.1139/y06-013)\]
*   14.Hosfield, C. M., Elce, J. S., Davies, P. L. & Jia, Z. Crystal structure of calpain reveals the structural basis for Ca(2+)-dependent protease activity and a novel mode of enzyme activation. _EMBO J._**18**, 6880–6889 (1999). 10.1093/emboj/18.24.6880 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/18.24.6880)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1171751/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10601010/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Hosfield,%20C.%20M.,%20Elce,%20J.%20S.,%20Davies,%20P.%20L.%20&%20Jia,%20Z.%20Crystal%20structure%20of%20calpain%20reveals%20the%20structural%20basis%20for%20Ca\(2+\)-dependent%20protease%20activity%20and%20a%20novel%20mode%20of%20enzyme%20activation.%20EMBO%20J.18,%206880%E2%80%936889%20\(1999\).%2010.1093/emboj/18.24.6880)\]
*   15.Viner, R. I., Ferrington, D. A., Huhmer, A. F., Bigelow, D. J. & Schoneich, C. Accumulation of nitrotyrosine on the SERCA2a isoform of SR Ca-ATPase of rat skeletal muscle during aging: a peroxynitrite-mediated process? _FEBS Lett._**379**, 286–290 (1996). 10.1016/0014-5793(95)01530-2 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/0014-5793\(95\)01530-2)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8603707/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Viner,%20R.%20I.,%20Ferrington,%20D.%20A.,%20Huhmer,%20A.%20F.,%20Bigelow,%20D.%20J.%20&%20Schoneich,%20C.%20Accumulation%20of%20nitrotyrosine%20on%20the%20SERCA2a%20isoform%20of%20SR%20Ca-ATPase%20of%20rat%20skeletal%20muscle%20during%20aging:%20a%20peroxynitrite-mediated%20process?%20FEBS%20Lett.379,%20286%E2%80%93290%20\(1996\).%2010.1016/0014-5793\(95\)01530-2)\]
*   16.Viner, R. I., Ferrington, D. A., Williams, T. D., Bigelow, D. J. & Schöneich, C. Protein modification during biological aging: selective tyrosine nitration of the SERCA2a isoform of the sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase in skeletal muscle. _Biochem. J._**340**, 657–669 (1999). 10.1042/bj3400657 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1042/bj3400657)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1220296/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10359649/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Viner,%20R.%20I.,%20Ferrington,%20D.%20A.,%20Williams,%20T.%20D.,%20Bigelow,%20D.%20J.%20&%20Sch%C3%B6neich,%20C.%20Protein%20modification%20during%20biological%20aging:%20selective%20tyrosine%20nitration%20of%20the%20SERCA2a%20isoform%20of%20the%20sarcoplasmic%20reticulum%20Ca2+-ATPase%20in%20skeletal%20muscle.%20Biochem.%20J.340,%20657%E2%80%93669%20\(1999\).%2010.1042/bj3400657)\]
*   17.Viner, R. I., Williams, T. D. & Schöneich, C. Peroxynitrite modification of protein thiols: oxidation, nitrosylation, and S-glutathiolation of functionally important cysteine residue(s) in the sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca-ATPase. _Biochemistry_**38**, 12408–12415 (1999). 10.1021/bi9909445 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi9909445)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10493809/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Viner,%20R.%20I.,%20Williams,%20T.%20D.%20&%20Sch%C3%B6neich,%20C.%20Peroxynitrite%20modification%20of%20protein%20thiols:%20oxidation,%20nitrosylation,%20and%20S-glutathiolation%20of%20functionally%20important%20cysteine%20residue\(s\)%20in%20the%20sarcoplasmic%20reticulum%20Ca-ATPase.%20Biochemistry38,%2012408%E2%80%9312415%20\(1999\).%2010.1021/bi9909445)\]
*   18.Tupling, A. R. et al. Effects of buthionine sulfoximine treatment on diaphragm contractility and SR Ca2+ pump function in rats. _J. Appl. Physiol._**103**, 1921–1928 (2007). 10.1152/japplphysiol.00529.2007 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1152/japplphysiol.00529.2007)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17717121/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Tupling,%20A.%20R.%20et%20al.%20Effects%20of%20buthionine%20sulfoximine%20treatment%20on%20diaphragm%20contractility%20and%20SR%20Ca2+%20pump%20function%20in%20rats.%20J.%20Appl.%20Physiol.103,%201921%E2%80%931928%20\(2007\).%2010.1152/japplphysiol.00529.2007)\]
*   19.Braun, J. L., Hamstra, S. I., Messner, H. N. & Fajardo, V. A. SERCA2a tyrosine nitration coincides with impairments in maximal SERCA activity in left ventricles from tafazzin-deficient mice. _Physiol. Rep._**7**, e14215 (2019). 10.14814/phy2.14215 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.14814/phy2.14215)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6708055/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31444868/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Braun,%20J.%20L.,%20Hamstra,%20S.%20I.,%20Messner,%20H.%20N.%20&%20Fajardo,%20V.%20A.%20SERCA2a%20tyrosine%20nitration%20coincides%20with%20impairments%20in%20maximal%20SERCA%20activity%20in%20left%20ventricles%20from%20tafazzin-deficient%20mice.%20Physiol.%20Rep.7,%20e14215%20\(2019\).%2010.14814/phy2.14215)\]
*   20.Braun, J. L. et al. Heterozygous SOD2 deletion selectively impairs SERCA function in the soleus of female mice. _Physiol. Rep._**10**, e15285 (2022). 10.14814/phy2.15285 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.14814/phy2.15285)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9114654/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35581738/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Braun,%20J.%20L.%20et%20al.%20Heterozygous%20SOD2%20deletion%20selectively%20impairs%20SERCA%20function%20in%20the%20soleus%20of%20female%20mice.%20Physiol.%20Rep.10,%20e15285%20\(2022\).%2010.14814/phy2.15285)\]
*   21.Cleverdon, R. E. G. et al. Sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase function is impaired in skeletal and cardiac muscles from young DBA/2J mdx mice. _iScience_**25**, 104972 (2022). 10.1016/j.isci.2022.104972 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2022.104972)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9459692/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36093052/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Cleverdon,%20R.%20E.%20G.%20et%20al.%20Sarco\(endo\)plasmic%20reticulum%20Ca\(2+\)-ATPase%20function%20is%20impaired%20in%20skeletal%20and%20cardiac%20muscles%20from%20young%20DBA/2J%20mdx%20mice.%20iScience25,%20104972%20\(2022\).%2010.1016/j.isci.2022.104972)\]
*   22.Qaisar, R. et al. Oxidative stress-induced dysregulation of excitation-contraction coupling contributes to muscle weakness. _J. Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle_**9**, 1003–1017 (2018). 10.1002/jcsm.12339 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcsm.12339)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6204588/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30073804/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Qaisar,%20R.%20et%20al.%20Oxidative%20stress-induced%20dysregulation%20of%20excitation-contraction%20coupling%20contributes%20to%20muscle%20weakness.%20J.%20Cachexia%20Sarcopenia%20Muscle9,%201003%E2%80%931017%20\(2018\).%2010.1002/jcsm.12339)\]
*   23.Fink, B. D., Bai, F., Yu, L. & Sivitz, W. I. Regulation of ATP production: dependence on calcium concentration and respiratory state. _Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol._**313**, C146–c153 (2017). 10.1152/ajpcell.00086.2017 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.00086.2017)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28515085/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Fink,%20B.%20D.,%20Bai,%20F.,%20Yu,%20L.%20&%20Sivitz,%20W.%20I.%20Regulation%20of%20ATP%20production:%20dependence%20on%20calcium%20concentration%20and%20respiratory%20state.%20Am.%20J.%20Physiol.%20Cell%20Physiol.313,%20C146%E2%80%93c153%20\(2017\).%2010.1152/ajpcell.00086.2017)\]
*   24.Glancy, B., Willis, W. T., Chess, D. J. & Balaban, R. S. Effect of calcium on the oxidative phosphorylation cascade in skeletal muscle mitochondria. _Biochemistry_**52**, 2793–2809 (2013). 10.1021/bi3015983 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi3015983)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4157357/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23547908/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Glancy,%20B.,%20Willis,%20W.%20T.,%20Chess,%20D.%20J.%20&%20Balaban,%20R.%20S.%20Effect%20of%20calcium%20on%20the%20oxidative%20phosphorylation%20cascade%20in%20skeletal%20muscle%20mitochondria.%20Biochemistry52,%202793%E2%80%932809%20\(2013\).%2010.1021/bi3015983)\]
*   25.Kavanagh, N. I., Ainscow, E. K. & Brand, M. D. Calcium regulation of oxidative phosphorylation in rat skeletal muscle mitochondria. _Biochim. Biophys. Acta_**1457**, 57–70 (2000). 10.1016/S0005-2728(00)00054-2 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0005-2728\(00\)00054-2)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10692550/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Kavanagh,%20N.%20I.,%20Ainscow,%20E.%20K.%20&%20Brand,%20M.%20D.%20Calcium%20regulation%20of%20oxidative%20phosphorylation%20in%20rat%20skeletal%20muscle%20mitochondria.%20Biochim.%20Biophys.%20Acta1457,%2057%E2%80%9370%20\(2000\).%2010.1016/S0005-2728\(00\)00054-2)\]
*   26.Pacher, P., Beckman, J. S. & Liaudet, L. Nitric oxide and peroxynitrite in health and disease. _Physiol. Rev._**87**, 315–424 (2007). 10.1152/physrev.00029.2006 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.00029.2006)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2248324/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17237348/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Pacher,%20P.,%20Beckman,%20J.%20S.%20&%20Liaudet,%20L.%20Nitric%20oxide%20and%20peroxynitrite%20in%20health%20and%20disease.%20Physiol.%20Rev.87,%20315%E2%80%93424%20\(2007\).%2010.1152/physrev.00029.2006)\]
*   27.Miao, L. & St Clair, D. K. Regulation of superoxide dismutase genes: implications in disease. _Free Radic. Biol. Med._**47**, 344–356 (2009). 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2009.05.018 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2009.05.018)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2731574/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19477268/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Miao,%20L.%20&%20St%20Clair,%20D.%20K.%20Regulation%20of%20superoxide%20dismutase%20genes:%20implications%20in%20disease.%20Free%20Radic.%20Biol.%20Med.47,%20344%E2%80%93356%20\(2009\).%2010.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2009.05.018)\]
*   28.Batinic-Haberle, I., Tovmasyan, A. & Spasojevic, I. An educational overview of the chemistry, biochemistry and therapeutic aspects of Mn porphyrins–from superoxide dismutation to H2O2-driven pathways. _Redox Biol._**5**, 43–65 (2015). 10.1016/j.redox.2015.01.017 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.redox.2015.01.017)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4392060/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25827425/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Batinic-Haberle,%20I.,%20Tovmasyan,%20A.%20&%20Spasojevic,%20I.%20An%20educational%20overview%20of%20the%20chemistry,%20biochemistry%20and%20therapeutic%20aspects%20of%20Mn%20porphyrins%E2%80%93from%20superoxide%20dismutation%20to%20H2O2-driven%20pathways.%20Redox%20Biol.5,%2043%E2%80%9365%20\(2015\).%2010.1016/j.redox.2015.01.017)\]
*   29.Batinic-Haberle, I. et al. SOD therapeutics: latest insights into their structure-activity relationships and impact on the cellular redox-based signaling pathways. _Antioxid. Redox Signal._**20**, 2372–2415 (2014). 10.1089/ars.2012.5147 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1089/ars.2012.5147)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4005498/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23875805/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Batinic-Haberle,%20I.%20et%20al.%20SOD%20therapeutics:%20latest%20insights%20into%20their%20structure-activity%20relationships%20and%20impact%20on%20the%20cellular%20redox-based%20signaling%20pathways.%20Antioxid.%20Redox%20Signal.20,%202372%E2%80%932415%20\(2014\).%2010.1089/ars.2012.5147)\]
*   30.Vujaskovic, Z. et al. A small molecular weight catalytic metalloporphyrin antioxidant with superoxide dismutase (SOD) mimetic properties protects lungs from radiation-induced injury. _Free Radic. Biol. Med._**33**, 857–863 (2002). 10.1016/S0891-5849(02)00980-2 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0891-5849\(02\)00980-2)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12208373/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Vujaskovic,%20Z.%20et%20al.%20A%20small%20molecular%20weight%20catalytic%20metalloporphyrin%20antioxidant%20with%20superoxide%20dismutase%20\(SOD\)%20mimetic%20properties%20protects%20lungs%20from%20radiation-induced%20injury.%20Free%20Radic.%20Biol.%20Med.33,%20857%E2%80%93863%20\(2002\).%2010.1016/S0891-5849\(02\)00980-2)\]
*   31.Pearlstein, R. D. et al. Metalloporphyrin antioxidants ameliorate normal tissue radiation damage in rat brain. _Int. J. Radiat. Biol._**86**, 145–163 (2010). 10.3109/09553000903419965 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3109/09553000903419965)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20148700/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Pearlstein,%20R.%20D.%20et%20al.%20Metalloporphyrin%20antioxidants%20ameliorate%20normal%20tissue%20radiation%20damage%20in%20rat%20brain.%20Int.%20J.%20Radiat.%20Biol.86,%20145%E2%80%93163%20\(2010\).%2010.3109/09553000903419965)\]
*   32.Mao, X. W. et al. Radioprotective effect of a metalloporphyrin compound in rat eye model. _Curr. Eye Res._**34**, 62–72 (2009). 10.1080/02713680802546948 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1080/02713680802546948)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19172472/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Mao,%20X.%20W.%20et%20al.%20Radioprotective%20effect%20of%20a%20metalloporphyrin%20compound%20in%20rat%20eye%20model.%20Curr.%20Eye%20Res.34,%2062%E2%80%9372%20\(2009\).%2010.1080/02713680802546948)\]
*   33.Mao, X. W., Crapo, J. D. & Gridley, D. S. Mitochondrial oxidative stress-induced apoptosis and radioprotection in proton-irradiated rat retina. _Radiat. Res._**178**, 118–125 (2012). 10.1667/RR2821.1 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1667/RR2821.1)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22780102/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Mao,%20X.%20W.,%20Crapo,%20J.%20D.%20&%20Gridley,%20D.%20S.%20Mitochondrial%20oxidative%20stress-induced%20apoptosis%20and%20radioprotection%20in%20proton-irradiated%20rat%20retina.%20Radiat.%20Res.178,%20118%E2%80%93125%20\(2012\).%2010.1667/RR2821.1)\]
*   34.Fajardo, V. A. et al. Dietary docosahexaenoic acid supplementation reduces SERCA Ca2+ transport efficiency in rat skeletal muscle. _Chem. Phys. Lipids_**187**, 56–61 (2015). 10.1016/j.chemphyslip.2015.03.001 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemphyslip.2015.03.001)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25772907/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Fajardo,%20V.%20A.%20et%20al.%20Dietary%20docosahexaenoic%20acid%20supplementation%20reduces%20SERCA%20Ca2+%20transport%20efficiency%20in%20rat%20skeletal%20muscle.%20Chem.%20Phys.%20Lipids187,%2056%E2%80%9361%20\(2015\).%2010.1016/j.chemphyslip.2015.03.001)\]
*   35.Bombardier, E., Smith, I. C., Vigna, C., Fajardo, V. A. & Tupling, A. R. Ablation of sarcolipin decreases the energy requirements for Ca2+ transport by sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPases in resting skeletal muscle. _FEBS Lett._**587**, 1687–1692 (2013). 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.04.019 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2013.04.019)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23628781/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Bombardier,%20E.,%20Smith,%20I.%20C.,%20Vigna,%20C.,%20Fajardo,%20V.%20A.%20&%20Tupling,%20A.%20R.%20Ablation%20of%20sarcolipin%20decreases%20the%20energy%20requirements%20for%20Ca2+%20transport%20by%20sarco\(endo\)plasmic%20reticulum%20Ca2+-ATPases%20in%20resting%20skeletal%20muscle.%20FEBS%20Lett.587,%201687%E2%80%931692%20\(2013\).%2010.1016/j.febslet.2013.04.019)\]
*   36.Tupling, R., Green, H. & Tupling, S. Partial ischemia reduces the efficiency of sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ transport in rat EDL. _Mol. Cell. Biochem._**224**, 91–102 (2001). 10.1023/A:1011930502758 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1011930502758)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11693204/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Tupling,%20R.,%20Green,%20H.%20&%20Tupling,%20S.%20Partial%20ischemia%20reduces%20the%20efficiency%20of%20sarcoplasmic%20reticulum%20Ca2+%20transport%20in%20rat%20EDL.%20Mol.%20Cell.%20Biochem.224,%2091%E2%80%93102%20\(2001\).%2010.1023/A:1011930502758)\]
*   37.Yin, H., Xu, L. & Porter, N. A. Free radical lipid peroxidation: mechanisms and analysis. _Chem. Rev._**111**, 5944–5972 (2011). 10.1021/cr200084z \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1021/cr200084z)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21861450/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Yin,%20H.,%20Xu,%20L.%20&%20Porter,%20N.%20A.%20Free%20radical%20lipid%20peroxidation:%20mechanisms%20and%20analysis.%20Chem.%20Rev.111,%205944%E2%80%935972%20\(2011\).%2010.1021/cr200084z)\]
*   38.Altaeva, E. G., Ogneva, I. V. & Shenkman, B. Dynamics of calcium ions accumulation and changes of isoforms of sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca-ATPase (SERCA) in soleus muscle fibers of rats and Mongolian gerbils under gravitational unloading of various duration. _Cell Tissue Biol._**4**, 594–599 (2010). 10.1134/S1990519X10060118 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1134/S1990519X10060118)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Altaeva,%20E.%20G.,%20Ogneva,%20I.%20V.%20&%20Shenkman,%20B.%20Dynamics%20of%20calcium%20ions%20accumulation%20and%20changes%20of%20isoforms%20of%20sarcoplasmic%20reticulum%20Ca-ATPase%20\(SERCA\)%20in%20soleus%20muscle%20fibers%20of%20rats%20and%20Mongolian%20gerbils%20under%20gravitational%20unloading%20of%20various%20duration.%20Cell%20Tissue%20Biol.4,%20594%E2%80%93599%20\(2010\).%2010.1134/S1990519X10060118)\]
*   39.Tupling, A. R. The sarcoplasmic reticulum in muscle fatigue and disease: role of the Sarco (endo)plasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase. _Can. J. Appl. Physiol._**29**, 308–329 (2004). 10.1139/h04-021 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1139/h04-021)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15199229/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Tupling,%20A.%20R.%20The%20sarcoplasmic%20reticulum%20in%20muscle%20fatigue%20and%20disease:%20role%20of%20the%20Sarco%20\(endo\)plasmic%20reticulum%20Ca2+-ATPase.%20Can.%20J.%20Appl.%20Physiol.29,%20308%E2%80%93329%20\(2004\).%2010.1139/h04-021)\]
*   40.Kanazawa, Y., Takahashi, T., Nagano, M., Koinuma, S. & Shigeyoshi, Y. The effects of aging on sarcoplasmic reticulum-related factors in the skeletal muscle of mice. _Int. J. Mol. Sci._10.3390/ijms25042148 (2024). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25042148)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10889371/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38396828/)\]
*   41.Fajardo, V. A. et al. Phospholamban overexpression in mice causes a centronuclear myopathy-like phenotype. _Dis. Model. Mech._**8**, 999–1009 (2015). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1242/dmm.020859)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4527296/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26035394/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Fajardo,%20V.%20A.%20et%20al.%20Phospholamban%20overexpression%20in%20mice%20causes%20a%20centronuclear%20myopathy-like%20phenotype.%20Dis.%20Model.%20Mech.8,%20999%E2%80%931009%20\(2015\).)\]
*   42.Braun, J. L. et al. Neuronatin promotes SERCA uncoupling and its expression is altered in skeletal muscles of high-fat diet-fed mice. _FEBS Lett._**595**, 2756–2767 (2021). 10.1002/1873-3468.14213 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/1873-3468.14213)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34693525/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Braun,%20J.%20L.%20et%20al.%20Neuronatin%20promotes%20SERCA%20uncoupling%20and%20its%20expression%20is%20altered%20in%20skeletal%20muscles%20of%20high-fat%20diet-fed%20mice.%20FEBS%20Lett.595,%202756%E2%80%932767%20\(2021\).%2010.1002/1873-3468.14213)\]
*   43.Stammers, A. N. et al. The regulation of sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum calcium-ATPases (SERCA). _Can. J. Physiol. Pharmacol._**93**, 843–854 (2015). 10.1139/cjpp-2014-0463 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1139/cjpp-2014-0463)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25730320/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Stammers,%20A.%20N.%20et%20al.%20The%20regulation%20of%20sarco\(endo\)plasmic%20reticulum%20calcium-ATPases%20\(SERCA\).%20Can.%20J.%20Physiol.%20Pharmacol.93,%20843%E2%80%93854%20\(2015\).%2010.1139/cjpp-2014-0463)\]
*   44.Smith, W. S., Broadbridge, R., East, J. M. & Lee, A. G. Sarcolipin uncouples hydrolysis of ATP from accumulation of Ca2+ by the Ca2+-ATPase of skeletal-muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum. _Biochem. J._**361**, 277–286 (2002). 10.1042/bj3610277 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1042/bj3610277)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1222307/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11772399/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Smith,%20W.%20S.,%20Broadbridge,%20R.,%20East,%20J.%20M.%20&%20Lee,%20A.%20G.%20Sarcolipin%20uncouples%20hydrolysis%20of%20ATP%20from%20accumulation%20of%20Ca2+%20by%20the%20Ca2+-ATPase%20of%20skeletal-muscle%20sarcoplasmic%20reticulum.%20Biochem.%20J.361,%20277%E2%80%93286%20\(2002\).%2010.1042/bj3610277)\]
*   45.Mao, X., Stanbouly, S., Holley, J., Pecaut, M. & Crapo, J. Evidence of spaceflight-induced adverse effects on photoreceptors and retinal function in the mouse eye. _Int. J. Mol. Sci._10.3390/ijms24087362 (2023). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24087362)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10138634/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37108526/)\]
*   46.Mao, X. W. et al. Characterization of mouse ocular response to a 35-day spaceflight mission: evidence of blood-retinal barrier disruption and ocular adaptations. _Sci. Rep._**9**, 8215 (2019). 10.1038/s41598-019-44696-0 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-44696-0)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6547757/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31160660/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Mao,%20X.%20W.%20et%20al.%20Characterization%20of%20mouse%20ocular%20response%20to%20a%2035-day%20spaceflight%20mission:%20evidence%20of%20blood-retinal%20barrier%20disruption%20and%20ocular%20adaptations.%20Sci.%20Rep.9,%208215%20\(2019\).%2010.1038/s41598-019-44696-0)\]
*   47.Arutyunyan, R. et al. The contraction of unweighted fast and slow rat muscles in calcium-free solution. _Basic Appl. Myol._**5**, 169–175 (1995). \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Arutyunyan,%20R.%20et%20al.%20The%20contraction%20of%20unweighted%20fast%20and%20slow%20rat%20muscles%20in%20calcium-free%20solution.%20Basic%20Appl.%20Myol.5,%20169%E2%80%93175%20\(1995\).)\]
*   48.Ingalls, C. P., Warren, G. L. & Armstrong, R. B. Intracellular Ca2+ transients in mouse soleus muscle after hindlimb unloading and reloading. _J. Appl. Physiol._**87**, 386–390 (1999). 10.1152/jappl.1999.87.1.386 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1152/jappl.1999.87.1.386)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10409599/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Ingalls,%20C.%20P.,%20Warren,%20G.%20L.%20&%20Armstrong,%20R.%20B.%20Intracellular%20Ca2+%20transients%20in%20mouse%20soleus%20muscle%20after%20hindlimb%20unloading%20and%20reloading.%20J.%20Appl.%20Physiol.87,%20386%E2%80%93390%20\(1999\).%2010.1152/jappl.1999.87.1.386)\]
*   49.Nemirovskaya, T. L. & Sharlo, K. A. Roles of ATP and SERCA in the regulation of calcium turnover in unloaded skeletal muscles: current view and future directions. _Int. J. Mol. Sci._10.3390/ijms23136937 (2022). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23136937)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9267070/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35805949/)\]
*   50.Shenkman, B. S. How postural muscle senses disuse? Early signs and signals. _Int. J. Mol. Sci._10.3390/ijms21145037 (2020). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21145037)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7404025/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32708817/)\]
*   51.Shenkman, B. S. & Nemirovskaya, T. L. Calcium-dependent signaling mechanisms and soleus fiber remodeling under gravitational unloading. _J. Muscle Res. Cell Motil._**29**, 221–230 (2008). 10.1007/s10974-008-9164-7 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10974-008-9164-7)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19130271/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Shenkman,%20B.%20S.%20&%20Nemirovskaya,%20T.%20L.%20Calcium-dependent%20signaling%20mechanisms%20and%20soleus%20fiber%20remodeling%20under%20gravitational%20unloading.%20J.%20Muscle%20Res.%20Cell%20Motil.29,%20221%E2%80%93230%20\(2008\).%2010.1007/s10974-008-9164-7)\]
*   52.Yoshioka, T., Shirota, T., Tazoe, T. & Yamashita-Goto, K. Calcium movement of sarcoplasmic reticulum from hindlimb suspended muscle. _Acta Astronaut._**38**, 209–212 (1996). 10.1016/0094-5765(96)00010-0 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/0094-5765\(96\)00010-0)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11540780/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Yoshioka,%20T.,%20Shirota,%20T.,%20Tazoe,%20T.%20&%20Yamashita-Goto,%20K.%20Calcium%20movement%20of%20sarcoplasmic%20reticulum%20from%20hindlimb%20suspended%20muscle.%20Acta%20Astronaut.38,%20209%E2%80%93212%20\(1996\).%2010.1016/0094-5765\(96\)00010-0)\]
*   53.Kushnir, A. et al. Intracellular calcium leak as a therapeutic target for RYR1-related myopathies. _Acta Neuropathol._**139**, 1089–1104 (2020). 10.1007/s00401-020-02150-w \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-020-02150-w)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7788518/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32236737/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Kushnir,%20A.%20et%20al.%20Intracellular%20calcium%20leak%20as%20a%20therapeutic%20target%20for%20RYR1-related%20myopathies.%20Acta%20Neuropathol.139,%201089%E2%80%931104%20\(2020\).%2010.1007/s00401-020-02150-w)\]
*   54.Lotteau, S. et al. A mechanism for statin-induced susceptibility to myopathy. _JACC Basic Transl. Sci._**4**, 509–523 (2019). 10.1016/j.jacbts.2019.03.012 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacbts.2019.03.012)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6712048/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31468006/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Lotteau,%20S.%20et%20al.%20A%20mechanism%20for%20statin-induced%20susceptibility%20to%20myopathy.%20JACC%20Basic%20Transl.%20Sci.4,%20509%E2%80%93523%20\(2019\).%2010.1016/j.jacbts.2019.03.012)\]
*   55.Kushnir, A. et al. Ryanodine receptor calcium leak in circulating B-lymphocytes as a biomarker in heart failure. _Circulation_**138**, 1144–1154 (2018). 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.032703 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.032703)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6162180/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29593014/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Kushnir,%20A.%20et%20al.%20Ryanodine%20receptor%20calcium%20leak%20in%20circulating%20B-lymphocytes%20as%20a%20biomarker%20in%20heart%20failure.%20Circulation138,%201144%E2%80%931154%20\(2018\).%2010.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.032703)\]
*   56.Robin, G., Berthier, C. & Allard, B. Sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ permeation explored from the lumen side in mdx muscle fibers under voltage control. _J. Gen. Physiol._**139**, 209–218 (2012). 10.1085/jgp.201110738 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.201110738)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3289961/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22371362/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Robin,%20G.,%20Berthier,%20C.%20&%20Allard,%20B.%20Sarcoplasmic%20reticulum%20Ca2+%20permeation%20explored%20from%20the%20lumen%20side%20in%20mdx%20muscle%20fibers%20under%20voltage%20control.%20J.%20Gen.%20Physiol.139,%20209%E2%80%93218%20\(2012\).%2010.1085/jgp.201110738)\]
*   57.Mukhina, A. M., Altaeva, E. G., Nemirovskaya, T. L. & Shenkman, B. S. The role of L-type calcium channels in the accumulation of Ca2+ in soleus muscle fibers in the rat and changes in the ratio of myosin and serca isoforms in conditions of gravitational unloading. _Neurosci. Behav. Physiol._**38**, 181–188 (2008). 10.1007/s11055-008-0027-x \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11055-008-0027-x)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18197386/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Mukhina,%20A.%20M.,%20Altaeva,%20E.%20G.,%20Nemirovskaya,%20T.%20L.%20&%20Shenkman,%20B.%20S.%20The%20role%20of%20L-type%20calcium%20channels%20in%20the%20accumulation%20of%20Ca2+%20in%20soleus%20muscle%20fibers%20in%20the%20rat%20and%20changes%20in%20the%20ratio%20of%20myosin%20and%20serca%20isoforms%20in%20conditions%20of%20gravitational%20unloading.%20Neurosci.%20Behav.%20Physiol.38,%20181%E2%80%93188%20\(2008\).%2010.1007/s11055-008-0027-x)\]
*   58.Froud, R. J., Earl, C. R., East, J. M. & Lee, A. G. Effects of lipid fatty acyl chain structure on the activity of the (Ca2+ + Mg2+)-ATPase. _Biochim. Biophys. Acta_**860**, 354–360 (1986). 10.1016/0005-2736(86)90532-8 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/0005-2736\(86\)90532-8)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2943317/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Froud,%20R.%20J.,%20Earl,%20C.%20R.,%20East,%20J.%20M.%20&%20Lee,%20A.%20G.%20Effects%20of%20lipid%20fatty%20acyl%20chain%20structure%20on%20the%20activity%20of%20the%20\(Ca2+%20+%20Mg2+\)-ATPase.%20Biochim.%20Biophys.%20Acta860,%20354%E2%80%93360%20\(1986\).%2010.1016/0005-2736\(86\)90532-8)\]
*   59.Cornea, R. L. & Thomas, D. D. Effects of membrane thickness on the molecular dynamics and enzymatic activity of reconstituted Ca-ATPase. _Biochemistry_**33**, 2912–2920 (1994). 10.1021/bi00176a022 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi00176a022)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8130205/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Cornea,%20R.%20L.%20&%20Thomas,%20D.%20D.%20Effects%20of%20membrane%20thickness%20on%20the%20molecular%20dynamics%20and%20enzymatic%20activity%20of%20reconstituted%20Ca-ATPase.%20Biochemistry33,%202912%E2%80%932920%20\(1994\).%2010.1021/bi00176a022)\]
*   60.Van der Paal, J., Neyts, E. C., Verlackt, C. C. W. & Bogaerts, A. Effect of lipid peroxidation on membrane permeability of cancer and normal cells subjected to oxidative stress. _Chem. Sci._**7**, 489–498 (2016). 10.1039/C5SC02311D \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1039/C5SC02311D)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5518669/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28791102/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Van%20der%20Paal,%20J.,%20Neyts,%20E.%20C.,%20Verlackt,%20C.%20C.%20W.%20&%20Bogaerts,%20A.%20Effect%20of%20lipid%20peroxidation%20on%20membrane%20permeability%20of%20cancer%20and%20normal%20cells%20subjected%20to%20oxidative%20stress.%20Chem.%20Sci.7,%20489%E2%80%93498%20\(2016\).%2010.1039/C5SC02311D)\]
*   61.Hirata, Y. et al. Lipid peroxidation increases membrane tension, Piezo1 gating, and cation permeability to execute ferroptosis. _Curr. Biol._**33**, 1282–1294.e1285 (2023). 10.1016/j.cub.2023.02.060 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2023.02.060)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36898371/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Hirata,%20Y.%20et%20al.%20Lipid%20peroxidation%20increases%20membrane%20tension,%20Piezo1%20gating,%20and%20cation%20permeability%20to%20execute%20ferroptosis.%20Curr.%20Biol.33,%201282%E2%80%931294.e1285%20\(2023\).%2010.1016/j.cub.2023.02.060)\]
*   62.Wong-Ekkabut, J. et al. Effect of lipid peroxidation on the properties of lipid bilayers: a molecular dynamics study. _Biophys. J._**93**, 4225–4236 (2007). 10.1529/biophysj.107.112565 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1529/biophysj.107.112565)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2098729/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17766354/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Wong-Ekkabut,%20J.%20et%20al.%20Effect%20of%20lipid%20peroxidation%20on%20the%20properties%20of%20lipid%20bilayers:%20a%20molecular%20dynamics%20study.%20Biophys.%20J.93,%204225%E2%80%934236%20\(2007\).%2010.1529/biophysj.107.112565)\]
*   63.Kravtsova, V. V. et al. Isoform-specific Na,K-ATPase alterations precede disuse-induced atrophy of rat soleus muscle. _Biomed. Res. Int._**2015**, 720172 (2015). 10.1155/2015/720172 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1155/2015/720172)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4309216/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25654120/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Kravtsova,%20V.%20V.%20et%20al.%20Isoform-specific%20Na,K-ATPase%20alterations%20precede%20disuse-induced%20atrophy%20of%20rat%20soleus%20muscle.%20Biomed.%20Res.%20Int.2015,%20720172%20\(2015\).%2010.1155/2015/720172)\]
*   64.Kravtsova, V. V. et al. Chronic ouabain prevents Na,K-ATPase dysfunction and targets AMPK and IL-6 in disused rat soleus muscle. _Int. J. Mol. Sci._10.3390/ijms22083920 (2021). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22083920)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8069997/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33920198/)\]
*   65.Avila-Medina, J. et al. In _Calcium Signaling_ (ed. Islam, M. S.) 489–504 (Springer Int. Publishing, 2020).
*   66.Edwards, J. N. et al. Upregulation of store-operated Ca2+ entry in dystrophic mdx mouse muscle. _Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol._**299**, C42–C50 (2010). 10.1152/ajpcell.00524.2009 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.00524.2009)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20427714/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Edwards,%20J.%20N.%20et%20al.%20Upregulation%20of%20store-operated%20Ca2+%20entry%20in%20dystrophic%20mdx%20mouse%20muscle.%20Am.%20J.%20Physiol.%20Cell%20Physiol.299,%20C42%E2%80%93C50%20\(2010\).%2010.1152/ajpcell.00524.2009)\]
*   67.Vandebrouck, C., Martin, D., Colson-Van Schoor, M., Debaix, H. & Gailly, P. Involvement of TRPC in the abnormal calcium influx observed in dystrophic (mdx) mouse skeletal muscle fibers. _J. Cell Biol._**158**, 1089–1096 (2002). 10.1083/jcb.200203091 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.200203091)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2173225/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12235126/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Vandebrouck,%20C.,%20Martin,%20D.,%20Colson-Van%20Schoor,%20M.,%20Debaix,%20H.%20&%20Gailly,%20P.%20Involvement%20of%20TRPC%20in%20the%20abnormal%20calcium%20influx%20observed%20in%20dystrophic%20\(mdx\)%20mouse%20skeletal%20muscle%20fibers.%20J.%20Cell%20Biol.158,%201089%E2%80%931096%20\(2002\).%2010.1083/jcb.200203091)\]
*   68.Lacruz, R. S. & Feske, S. Diseases caused by mutations in ORAI1 and STIM1. _Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci._**1356**, 45–79 (2015). 10.1111/nyas.12938 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/nyas.12938)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4692058/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26469693/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Lacruz,%20R.%20S.%20&%20Feske,%20S.%20Diseases%20caused%20by%20mutations%20in%20ORAI1%20and%20STIM1.%20Ann.%20N.%20Y.%20Acad.%20Sci.1356,%2045%E2%80%9379%20\(2015\).%2010.1111/nyas.12938)\]
*   69.Indo, H. P. et al. Changes in mitochondrial homeostasis and redox status in astronauts following long stays in space. _Sci. Rep._**6**, 39015 (2016). 10.1038/srep39015 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/srep39015)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5159838/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27982062/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Indo,%20H.%20P.%20et%20al.%20Changes%20in%20mitochondrial%20homeostasis%20and%20redox%20status%20in%20astronauts%20following%20long%20stays%20in%20space.%20Sci.%20Rep.6,%2039015%20\(2016\).%2010.1038/srep39015)\]
*   70.Gehrig, S. M. et al. Hsp72 preserves muscle function and slows progression of severe muscular dystrophy. _Nature_**484**, 394–398 (2012). 10.1038/nature10980 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature10980)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22495301/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Gehrig,%20S.%20M.%20et%20al.%20Hsp72%20preserves%20muscle%20function%20and%20slows%20progression%20of%20severe%20muscular%20dystrophy.%20Nature484,%20394%E2%80%93398%20\(2012\).%2010.1038/nature10980)\]
*   71.da Silveira, W. A. et al. Comprehensive multi-omics analysis reveals mitochondrial stress as a central biological hub for spaceflight impact. _Cell_**183**, 1185–1201. e1120 (2020). 10.1016/j.cell.2020.11.002 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.11.002)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7870178/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33242417/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?da%20Silveira,%20W.%20A.%20et%20al.%20Comprehensive%20multi-omics%20analysis%20reveals%20mitochondrial%20stress%20as%20a%20central%20biological%20hub%20for%20spaceflight%20impact.%20Cell183,%201185%E2%80%931201.%20e1120%20\(2020\).%2010.1016/j.cell.2020.11.002)\]
*   72.Garrett-Bakelman, F. E. et al. The NASA Twins Study: a multidimensional analysis of a year-long human spaceflight. _Science_10.1126/science.aau8650 (2019). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aau8650)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7580864/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30975860/)\]
*   73.Mao, X. W. et al. Role of NADPH oxidase as a mediator of oxidative damage in low-dose irradiated and hindlimb-unloaded mice. _Radiat. Res._**188**, 392–399 (2017). 10.1667/RR14754.1 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1667/RR14754.1)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28763287/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Mao,%20X.%20W.%20et%20al.%20Role%20of%20NADPH%20oxidase%20as%20a%20mediator%20of%20oxidative%20damage%20in%20low-dose%20irradiated%20and%20hindlimb-unloaded%20mice.%20Radiat.%20Res.188,%20392%E2%80%93399%20\(2017\).%2010.1667/RR14754.1)\]
*   74.Kumar, A., Tahimic, C. G., Almeida, E. A. & Globus, R. K. Spaceflight modulates the expression of key oxidative stress and cell cycle related genes in heart. _Int. J. Mol. Sci._**22**, 9088 (2021). 10.3390/ijms22169088 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22169088)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8396460/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34445793/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Kumar,%20A.,%20Tahimic,%20C.%20G.,%20Almeida,%20E.%20A.%20&%20Globus,%20R.%20K.%20Spaceflight%20modulates%20the%20expression%20of%20key%20oxidative%20stress%20and%20cell%20cycle%20related%20genes%20in%20heart.%20Int.%20J.%20Mol.%20Sci.22,%209088%20\(2021\).%2010.3390/ijms22169088)\]
*   75.Andersson, D. C. et al. Ryanodine receptor oxidation causes intracellular calcium leak and muscle weakness in aging. _Cell Metab._**14**, 196–207 (2011). 10.1016/j.cmet.2011.05.014 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2011.05.014)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3690519/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21803290/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Andersson,%20D.%20C.%20et%20al.%20Ryanodine%20receptor%20oxidation%20causes%20intracellular%20calcium%20leak%20and%20muscle%20weakness%20in%20aging.%20Cell%20Metab.14,%20196%E2%80%93207%20\(2011\).%2010.1016/j.cmet.2011.05.014)\]
*   76.Agrawal, A. et al. Redox modification of ryanodine receptor contributes to impaired Ca(2+) homeostasis and exacerbates muscle atrophy under high altitude. _Free Radic. Biol. Med._**160**, 643–656 (2020). 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2020.09.001 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2020.09.001)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32916280/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Agrawal,%20A.%20et%20al.%20Redox%20modification%20of%20ryanodine%20receptor%20contributes%20to%20impaired%20Ca\(2+\)%20homeostasis%20and%20exacerbates%20muscle%20atrophy%20under%20high%20altitude.%20Free%20Radic.%20Biol.%20Med.160,%20643%E2%80%93656%20\(2020\).%2010.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2020.09.001)\]
*   77.Bellinger, A. M. et al. Hypernitrosylated ryanodine receptor calcium release channels are leaky in dystrophic muscle. _Nat. Med._**15**, 325–330 (2009). 10.1038/nm.1916 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.1916)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2910579/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19198614/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Bellinger,%20A.%20M.%20et%20al.%20Hypernitrosylated%20ryanodine%20receptor%20calcium%20release%20channels%20are%20leaky%20in%20dystrophic%20muscle.%20Nat.%20Med.15,%20325%E2%80%93330%20\(2009\).%2010.1038/nm.1916)\]
*   78.Sharlo, K. A. et al. The effect of SERCA activation on functional characteristics and signaling of rat soleus muscle upon 7 days of unloading. _Biomolecules_10.3390/biom13091354 (2023). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/biom13091354)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10526198/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37759754/)\]
*   79.Chambers, P. J., Juracic, E. S., Fajardo, V. A. & Tupling, A. R. Role of SERCA and sarcolipin in adaptive muscle remodeling. _Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol._**322**, C382–c394 (2022). 10.1152/ajpcell.00198.2021 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.00198.2021)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35044855/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Chambers,%20P.%20J.,%20Juracic,%20E.%20S.,%20Fajardo,%20V.%20A.%20&%20Tupling,%20A.%20R.%20Role%20of%20SERCA%20and%20sarcolipin%20in%20adaptive%20muscle%20remodeling.%20Am.%20J.%20Physiol.%20Cell%20Physiol.322,%20C382%E2%80%93c394%20\(2022\).%2010.1152/ajpcell.00198.2021)\]
*   80.Choi, S. Y. et al. Validation of a new rodent experimental system to investigate consequences of long duration space habitation. _Sci. Rep._**10**, 2336 (2020). 10.1038/s41598-020-58898-4 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-58898-4)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7012842/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32047211/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Choi,%20S.%20Y.%20et%20al.%20Validation%20of%20a%20new%20rodent%20experimental%20system%20to%20investigate%20consequences%20of%20long%20duration%20space%20habitation.%20Sci.%20Rep.10,%202336%20\(2020\).%2010.1038/s41598-020-58898-4)\]
*   81.Sun, G. S. et al. Evaluation of the nutrient-upgraded rodent food bar for rodent spaceflight experiments. _Nutrition_**26**, 1163–1169 (2010). 10.1016/j.nut.2009.09.018 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nut.2009.09.018)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20116210/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Sun,%20G.%20S.%20et%20al.%20Evaluation%20of%20the%20nutrient-upgraded%20rodent%20food%20bar%20for%20rodent%20spaceflight%20experiments.%20Nutrition26,%201163%E2%80%931169%20\(2010\).%2010.1016/j.nut.2009.09.018)\]
*   82.Overbey, E. G. et al. Spaceflight influences gene expression, photoreceptor integrity, and oxidative stress-related damage in the murine retina. _Sci. Rep._**9**, 13304 (2019). 10.1038/s41598-019-49453-x \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-49453-x)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6746706/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31527661/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Overbey,%20E.%20G.%20et%20al.%20Spaceflight%20influences%20gene%20expression,%20photoreceptor%20integrity,%20and%20oxidative%20stress-related%20damage%20in%20the%20murine%20retina.%20Sci.%20Rep.9,%2013304%20\(2019\).%2010.1038/s41598-019-49453-x)\]
*   83.Kremsky, I. et al. Spaceflight-induced gene expression profiles in the mouse brain are attenuated by treatment with the antioxidant BuOE. _Int. J. Mol. Sci._10.3390/ijms241713569 (2023). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms241713569)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10487739/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37686374/)\]

## Associated Data

_This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article._

### Supplementary Materials

### Data Availability Statement

The data that support this study are available at the NASA Open Science Data Repository (10.26030/mx0n-ta73).