---
title: "A member of the CONSTANS-Like protein family is a putative regulator of reactive oxygen species homeostasis and spaceflight physiological adaptation"
authors: ["Natasha J Sng", "Bryan Kolaczkowski", "Robert J Ferl", "Anna-Lisa Paul"]
journal: "AoB Plants"
date: "2018 Dec 15"
doi: "10.1093/aobpla/ply075"
source_url: "https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6348315/"
---

# A member of the CONSTANS-Like protein family is a putative regulator of reactive oxygen species homeostasis and spaceflight physiological adaptation

*AoB Plants*, 2018 Dec 15, [doi:10.1093/aobpla/ply075](https://doi.org/10.1093/aobpla/ply075)

### Natasha J Sng
### Bryan Kolaczkowski
### Robert J Ferl
### Anna-Lisa Paul

## Abstract

A feature of the physiological adaptation to spaceflight in _Arabidopsis thaliana_ (_Arabidopsis_) is the induction of reactive oxygen species (ROS)-associated gene expression. The patterns of ROS-associated gene expression vary among _Arabidopsis_ ecotypes, and the role of ROS signalling in spaceflight acclimation is unknown. What could differences in ROS gene regulation between ecotypes on orbit reveal about physiological adaptation to novel environments? Analyses of ecotype-dependent responses to spaceflight resulted in the elucidation of a previously uncharacterized gene (_OMG1_) as being ROS-associated. The _OMG1_ 5′ flanking region is an active promoter in cells where ROS activity is commonly observed, such as in pollen tubes, root hairs, and in other tissues upon wounding. qRT-PCR analyses revealed that upon wounding on Earth, OMG1 is an apparent transcriptional regulator of _MYB77_ and _GRX480_, which are associated with the ROS pathway. Fluorescence-based ROS assays show that OMG1 affects ROS production. Phylogenetic analysis of OMG1 and closely related homologs suggests that OMG1 is a distant, unrecognized member of the CONSTANS-Like protein family, a member that arose via gene duplication early in the angiosperm lineage and subsequently lost its first DNA-binding B-box1 domain. These data illustrate that members of the rapidly evolving COL protein family play a role in regulating ROS pathway functions, and their differential regulation on orbit suggests a role for ROS signalling in spaceflight physiological adaptation.

**Keywords:** _Arabidopsis thaliana_, B-box domain, CONSTANS-Like, ecotype-specific, microgravity, reactive oxygen species, spaceflight, transcription factor, uncharacterized genes

* * *

Plants adjust to spaceflight by changing patterns of gene expression. The analysis of how different _Arabidopsis_ plants respond to space resulted in the discovery of a previously uncharacterized gene (_OMG1_), which was consistently induced in space. This research revealed that OMG1 belongs to the CONSTANS-Like protein family and is involved in maintaining the reactive oxygen species pathway, which appears to be an important feature of the physiological adaptation of plants to the spaceflight environment. It also shows that spaceflight experiments can be used as a platform to discover novel gene function and provide further insights into terrestrial plant biology.

## Introduction

The complex networks and signalling pathways that equip plants to cope with environmental challenge developed over evolutionary time in terrestrial environments. Exposing plants to novel environments presents opportunities to understand how plants adjust to conditions outside their evolutionary experience. Spaceflight is one such novel environment, and understanding how plants function outside of Earth’s boundaries is also integral to space exploration. Plants respond to spaceflight in ways that are dependent on species, ecotype, genetics and even organs ([Cowles _et al._ 1984](#CIT0009); [Hoson _et al._ 2002](#CIT0025); [Soga _et al._ 2002](#CIT0079); [Paul _et al._ 2013a](#CIT0064); [Ferl _et al._ 2014](#CIT0013)). Indeed, even a single gene difference can influence the spaceflight response ([Paul _et al._ 2017](#CIT0063)), thus investigating ecotype-dependent spaceflight transcriptomes can reveal strategies for physiological adaptation to spaceflight while expanding understanding of gene function in terrestrial environments.

The physiological impact of spaceflight is reflected in the patterns of gene expression. Irrespective of plant growth hardware, duration in space or age of plants, one consensus is that spaceflight elicits responses from pathways associated with cell wall remodelling, cell polarity, phytohormone-mediated processes, as well as general stress responses, such as wounding, pathogen defence, heat shock and reactive oxygen species (ROS) ([Joo _et al._ 2001](#CIT0031); [Paul _et al._ 2005](#CIT0062), [2012b](#CIT0065), [2013a](#CIT0064); [Correll _et al._ 2013](#CIT0008); [Zupanska _et al._ 2013](#CIT0092); [Ferl _et al._ 2014](#CIT0013); [Mazars _et al._ 2014](#CIT0052); [Sugimoto _et al._ 2014](#CIT0080); [Zhang _et al._ 2014](#CIT0091); [Kwon _et al._ 2015](#CIT0038); [Schüler _et al._ 2015](#CIT0071)). In addition, a large proportion of genes differentially expressed in spaceflight encode unknown proteins.

Spaceflight-grown _Arabidopsis_ roots tend to be smaller, have fewer lateral roots and shorter root hair development than their terrestrial controls ([Paul _et al._ 2012a](#CIT0060); [Kwon _et al._ 2015](#CIT0038)). Aspects of these morphologies in ecotype Columbia (Col-0) suggest a relationship between the down-regulation of several peroxidase genes in spaceflight ([Kwon _et al._ 2015](#CIT0038)).

In this study, a spaceflight-induced gene of unknown function identified from roots was investigated for its potential involvement in ROS-related functions. AT1G05290, which we have dubbed _Orbitally Manifested Gene 1_ (_OMG1_), was one of the highest significantly (_P_ = 0.0005) induced genes in the Advanced Plant Experiment 01 (APEX01) spaceflight data set (fold change = 12) ([Paul _et al._ 2013a](#CIT0064)). Two distinct biochemical assays typically used to measure ROS activity indicated that knocking out OMG1 alters the production of ROS. Co-expression networks around _OMG1_ show correlations to genes involved in ROS-associated oxidative phosphorylation pathways [Obayashi _et al_. 2014](#CIT0057). _OMG1_ was also expressed in organs known to highly utilize ROS during development, such as root hairs and pollen tubes ([Shin and Schachtman 2004](#CIT0077); [Potocký _et al._ 2007](#CIT0068); [Winter _et al._ 2007](#CIT0086); [Lassig _et al._ 2014](#CIT0041)). In addition, _OMG1_ is an unrealized member of the CONSTANS-Like family of transcription factors. These findings, originating with the novel environment of spaceflight, further the understanding of plant growth and development and provide insight into the role of a heretofore unknown gene.

## Materials and Methods

### ROSMETER analysis

The ROSMETER tool assesses the ROS-related transcriptomic signature in a large-scale _Arabidopsis_ gene expression data set ([Rosenwasser _et al._ 2013](#CIT0070)). _Arabidopsis_ gene expression profiles from two independent spaceflight experiments, APEX01 and Advanced Plant Experiment 03-2 (APEX03-2), along with their corresponding ground controls, were used to correlate differential gene expression in spaceflight with specific ROS species and origins. The APEX01 experiment utilized two ecotypes and both were planted on each plate of the experiment. Since the entire plate was harvested on orbit to a single tube, the subsequent transcriptomic analyses comprised 60 % Wassilewskija (WS) and 40 % Col-0 ([Paul _et al._ 2013b](#CIT0066)). In the APEX03-2 data set, WS and Col-0 were kept on separate plates, harvested into separate tubes and analysed individually. A data set from Col-0 compared to WS vertically grown in standard laboratory conditions was included as an additional control ([Schultz _et al._ 2017](#CIT0072)). From each data set, Affymetrix Probeset-ID, Gene Locus ID, _P_\-value and fold change were listed and submitted to ROSMETER. The heatmap was constructed using the GENE-E software with hierarchical clustering using the Matrix value offered in the software.

### Plant materials and growth conditions

Seeds from both Col-0 and WS were prepared for APEX01 and APEX03-2 as previously described ([Paul _et al._ 2012b](#CIT0065), [2013b](#CIT0066); [Sng _et al._ 2014](#CIT0078); [Ferl and Paul 2016](#CIT0014)). Briefly, plants were cultured on Phytagel™ 10 cm Petri plates and grown either in the Advanced Biological Research System (ABRS) hardware (APEX01), or in the Veggie hardware (APEX03-2) under continuous lighting of ~80–135 μmol m−2 s−1 PAR. In this study, the effects of the spaceflight environment were evaluated, which includes ambient radiation, microgravity and attending effects on convection. In both experiments, the ground control plants were grown with a 24- to 48-h schedule delay that allowed the comparable ground growth chambers to be programmed with the precise environmental conditions that the International Space Station (ISS)-grown plants received on orbit.

Plants grown for additional laboratory analyses were grown on Phytagel™ 10 cm plates or in soil, and placed in a greenhouse growth chamber on a 24-h light cycle (~80 μmol m−2 s−1 PAR) at 22 °C.

### OMG1 promoter::GUSmgfp5 transgenic plants and analyses

A 0.8-kb 5′ flanking region upstream of the OMG1 (AT1G05290) initial Met was amplified from _Arabidopsis_ gDNA using primer pair A **\[see**[**Supporting Information—Table S1**](#sup1)**\]**, which contains restriction enzyme sites BamHI in the forward primer and NcoI in the reverse. The sequenced and confirmed BamHI/NcoI fragment containing the OMG1 5′ flanking region was cloned into pCAMBIA1303 to create the OMG1p::GUSmgfp5 fusion construct. Although this region may not represent the full complement of motifs that regulate OMG1, the 0.8-kb 5′ flanking region does serve to promote OMG1 transcription and will be referred to as the basal promoter. The construct was then transformed into _Agrobacterium_ (_Agrobacterium tumefaciens_) strain GV3101 for floral dip transformation into WS plants ([Clough and Bent 1998](#CIT0007)). Ten independent OMG1p::GUSmgfp5 transgenic lines grown on selection media (250 mg L−1 Carbenecillin and 50 mg L−1 Hygromycin) were screened for T3 homozygosity. Plants grown on Phytagel plates were used for histochemical localization of β-glucuronidase (GUS) ([Jefferson _et al._ 1987](#CIT0030)).

Pollen and pollen tube analyses were performed as described ([Li _et al._ 1999](#CIT0044)). T1 heterozygous populations of pollen grains and tubes were incubated with X-Gluc to reveal the specificity of the histochemical localization in transformed pollen. Basal OMG1 promoter activity in plants requires ~3 h of staining before detection of GUS in the various locations, whereas GUS activity induced by wounding was observed within 30 min of staining.

In the GUS qRT-PCR wounding experiments with OMG1p::GUSmgfp5, comparable leaves from three individual plants were crimped with forceps and left intact on the plant for the duration of each time point (30 min, 1, 4 and 16 h). Leaves were harvested to liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C until RNA extraction. In the mock and immediate time point, leaves were either unwounded or crimped and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. Total RNA was extracted using RNAeasy (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. cDNA transcribed from total RNA was used to analyse the transcript abundance of _GUSA_. Primer pairs B and C **\[see**[**Supporting Information—Table S1**](#sup1)**\]** were used for the analyses. _GUSA_ transcript abundance was normalized to UBQ11 (AT4G05050).

### Gene expression analyses of OMG1 and other downstream genes

OMG1 RT-qPCR analyses used TaqMan™ (Applied Biosystems) on spaceflight material from APEX01 and APEX03-2. _OMG1_ gene expression was normalized to _UBQ11_ primer and probe sequences D and E **\[see**[**Supporting Information—Table S1**](#sup1)**\]**. The _omg1_ knockout (KO) line (SALK\_045742C) was validated for a homozygous T-DNA insertion using primers F. Homozygous lines were selfed until all progeny were homozygous and screened for the absence of full-length _OMG1_ transcript **\[see**[**Supporting Information—Fig. S1**](#sup1)**\]**. RT-qPCR analyses of _OMG1_ expression induced by a time course wounding assay were performed on wild-type (WT) Col-0, WS and _omg1_ lines. Three individual plants with leaves of similar ages and sizes were wounded by crushing between two glass slides. The wounded leaves were left attached to the plant for the allotted times (mock, immediate, 5, 10, 30 min and 1 h) before being harvested into liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C. RT-qPCR analysis was conducted using SYBR Green master mix (Applied Biosystems) along with the primer pairs C, D (without probe), G–H and L–R **\[see**[**Supporting Information—Table S1**](#sup1)**\]**.

### Fluorescent biochemical ROS assays

For the ROS accumulation assay, intact leaves from WT Col-0, _omg1_ KO and _rbohd_ KO (SALK\_070610) were wounded with a 10 µL pipette tip and immediately immersed into the fluorescent probe 5-(and 6)-carboxy-2′,7′-dichloro dihydrofluorescein diacetate (DCF-DA) (Sigma) solution as described in ([Beneloujaephajri _et al._ 2013](#CIT0002)). Briefly, wounded and unwounded leaves were vacuum infiltrated in the dark for 20 min in 60 µM of DCF-DA in standard buffer. Leaves were then rinsed in standard buffer and observed under GFP bandpass filters using the Olympus BX51 compound light microscope at 10× magnification with 55 ms exposure time. Quantification of fluorescence intensity using ImageJ software was previously described ([Jakic _et al._ 2017](#CIT0029)).

A luminol-based ROS assay was done by measuring hydrogen peroxide produced by leaf discs when exposed to flg22. Discs (0.125 cm2) of 6-week-old WT Col-0, _omg1_ and _rbohd_ plants were incubated in 100 µL ddH2O overnight in 96-well luminometer plates. Water was replaced with the reaction solution of 40 µM luminol (Sigma-Aldrich) and 10 µg mL−1 horseradish peroxidase (Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with 50 nM of flg22 or water for the mock controls. ROS measurements expressed as means of RLU (relative light units) were taken at 2-min intervals for a period of 38 min.

### Phylogenetic analysis

Protein sequences were identified by rpsblast search of the NR database ([Marchler-Bauer and Bryant 2004](#CIT0047); [Marchler-Bauer _et al_. 2015](#CIT0048); [NCBI Resource Coordinators 2016](#CIT0093)); full-length protein sequences containing a single CCT domain (pfam06203) with _e_\-value < 0.01 were considered potential OMG1 homologs. Protein sequences were aligned using Clustal Omega v1.2.3 ([Sievers _et al_. 2011](#CIT0103)), PROBALIGN ([Roshan and Livesay 2006](#CIT0101)), MUSCLE v3.8.31 ([Edgar 2004](#CIT0094)), MSAProbs v0.97 ([Liu _et al._ 2010](#CIT0046)), PROBCONS ([Do _et al._ 2005](#CIT0012)) and mafft-einsi v7.215 ([Katoh and Standley 2013](#CIT0034)), with default parameters. Alignments were left unprocessed or processed by Gblocks v0.91 to remove potentially ambiguous regions ([Talavera and Castresana 2007](#CIT0105)). The minimum number of sequences for a flank position (-b2) was 3/5 the total number of sequences. The maximum number of contiguous non-conserved positions (-b3) was 10. The minimum block length (-b4) was 5, and gap positions were allowed (-b5 = a). Other Gblocks parameters were left at default values. Initial maximum likelihood phylogenies were constructed from each alignment using FastTree v2.1.7 with default parameters ([Price _et al_. 2010](#CIT0106)). Initial trees were used as starting trees for full maximum likelihood reconstruction using RAxML v8.2.8 ([Stamatakis 2014](#CIT0104)). Maximum likelihood phylogenies produced from each alignment were converted to a clade presence-absence matrix using the Super Tree Toolkit v0.1.2 ([Hill and Davis 2014](#CIT0095)), and a supertree was inferred from this matrix using the BINCAT model in RAxML ([Nguyen _et al_. 2012](#CIT0102)). Additionally, all individual sequence alignments were concatenated into a single supermatrix, which was used to infer the maximum likelihood protein family phylogeny using RAxML, with the best-fit evolutionary model selected by AIC ([Wheeler _et al_. 1995](#CIT0107)). A consensus of ‘supertree’ and ‘supermatrix’ results was plotted using FigTree v1.4.3.

Protein structural modelling of the B-box2 domain was done using both the Phyre2 and Chimera ([Pettersen _et al._ 2004](#CIT0067)). The closest OMG1 homolog, c2junA of the human Midline-1 (MID1) with a 92 % confidence level was used to predict the overall folding of the B-box domains in OMG1. The predicted structural model of OMG1 was compared to the x-ray crystal structure of c2junA using Chimera and MatchMaker. Side chains positioned near the zinc ions were displayed to predict the potential of OMG1 binding to zinc ions.

### 35S promoter:OMG1cds-sGFPS65T fusion construct for subcellular localization

The coding sequence of OMG1 (RefSeq ID:[NP\_172021.2](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein/NP_172021.2)) was amplified from cDNA using primer pair I **\[see**[**Supporting Information—Table S1**](#sup1)**\]**. The PCR fragment was sequenced before being cloned into the pCAMBIA1303 along with sGFP(S65T) ([Chiu _et al._ 1996](#CIT0005)) gene via SpeI and BstEII restriction sites using primer pairs J **\[see**[**Supporting Information—Table S1**](#sup1)**\]**. Primer pair K was then used to amplify the entire OMG1cds-sGFP(S65T), which was validated by sequencing and cloned into pCAMBIA1302 vector via NcoI and BstEII restriction sites. For subcellular localization, _Agrobacterium_\-GV3101 containing 100 µM acetosyringone, 0.05 % Silwet-77 and the pCAMBIA1302 vector or pCAMBIA1302-OMG1cds-sGFPS65T fusion vector were incubated in the dark for 20 min at 28 °C. Leaves of 4-week-old tobacco (_Nicotiana benthamiana_) seedlings were injected and GFP signal was observed after 2 days at 25 °C in the dark. DAPI was used to indicate the nucleus.

## Results

### ROS-producing genes are differentially expressed in response to spaceflight in an ecotype-specific manner

The differential gene expression data sets of the three independent spaceflight experiments and their comparable ground controls were used in the ROSMETER analyses. The heatmap shows the positive-(red), negative-(blue) and no correlation-(black) between the ROS indices and the queried spaceflight transcriptomes ([Fig. 1A](#F1)). A general positive correlation of ROS-producing genes was observed in all the spaceflight transcriptomes and hierarchical clustering displayed a higher similarity with the APEX03-2\_WS data set compared to the APEX03-2\_Col-0 data set. Two interesting ROS correlation groups were observed in the heatmap. Group A showed that only the spaceflight transcriptome of WS positively correlated with the cytoplasmic ascorbate peroxidase knockout (KO-_APX1_) experiments, which represent cytoplasmic H2O2 ROS indices, whereas in the Col-0 background cytosolic ROS shows no correlation. Group B showed ecotype-related differences in the correlations associated with mitochondrial stress. Specifically, TDNA-AOX-MLD and Retenone-3h indices showed that if one ecotype had a positive correlation the other had no correlation. In addition, in the Retenone-12h and TDNA-AOX indices, the mixed ecotype transcriptome shows a similar trend to one of the two ecotypes. The control data set, which reflects terrestrial ecotype differences between Col-0 and WS, showed that many of the genes differentially expressed between the two ecotypes are associated with the ROS-scavenging mechanism. A representative transcriptome heatmap from the APEX03-2 spaceflight experiment that compared several significantly (_P_ < 0.01) differentially expressed (>1 or −1 < log2 fold change) peroxidase genes between 4-day-old Col-0 and WS ecotypes illustrated that Col-0 alters the expression of many more peroxidase genes in spaceflight than does WS ([Fig. 1B](#F1)). Peroxidases, an integral part of ROS signalling in cell wall remodelling, cell elongation, auxin catabolism, and response to abiotic and biotic stress, ([Shigeto and Tsutsumi 2016](#CIT0074)) were found to be differentially expressed in spaceflight.

### OMG1 transcript is up-regulated in WS ecotype across multiple spaceflight experiments

_OMG1_ expression was up-regulated in WS roots across multiple spaceflight experiments (APEX01-1B, APEX01-2B and APEX03-2) but remained unchanged in Col-0 ([Fig. 2](#F2)). The Box-Whisker plot of [Fig. 2](#F2) illustrates the median fold change of _OMG1_ expression between spaceflight and the ground control from a total of nine replicates from each sample. Each spaceflight experiment represents a distinct launch and orbital plant growth event. In both the APEX01 experiments, seeds germinated on orbit grew for 12 days before being harvested. _OMG1_ expression shows a 4-fold change in spaceflight compared to ground controls in APEX01-2B and 3.5-fold change in APEX01-1B. In both analyses, the large spread between the maximum and the minimum can be attributed to the mixture of ecotypes. In a subsequent spaceflight experiment, APEX03-2, plants grew for 8 or 11 days on the ISS before being harvested. In the APEX03-2 8-day-old plants, Col-0 showed a median fold change of 1 (no change), whereas WS showed a 3.9-fold increase in spaceflight. In the APEX03-2 11-day-old plants, Col-0 showed a median fold change of 1 and WS showed a 2.1-fold increase in expression.

### The OMG1 basal promoter activity was observed in roots, pollen tubes and upon wounding

Histochemical GUS staining revealed some basal _OMG1_ promoter activity in roots and pollen but showed heighten activity upon wounding in the roots and leaves. T3 homozygous _OMG1_p::_GUSmgfp5_ transgenic plants were used to characterize the activity of the _OMG1_ promoter. In roots, basal _OMG1_ promoter activity was observed at low levels in the maturation zone of both the primary and lateral roots and root hairs ([Fig. 3A](#F3), i–iv). In addition, basal promoter activity was also observed in pollen grains and pollen tubes ([Fig. 3A](#F3), v–vii). A T1 heterozygous population of pollen grains grown in pollen germinating media ([Fig. 3A](#F3), vii) was used to visualize the specificity of the GUS enzymatic reactions in transformed pollen. Serendipitously, wounded plant tissues were observed to have heightened _OMG1_ promoter activity ([Fig. 3B](#F3)).

To ensure that _OMG1_ promoter activity was specific to wounding, leaf and root tissues from WT Col-0, _ADHp::GUS_ ([Chung and Ferl 1999](#CIT0006)) and _OMG1p_::_GUSmgfp5_ lines were wounded with a pair of forceps. In this wounding experiment, GUS staining was observed only in the _OMG1p::GUSmgfp5_ line. A qRT-PCR analysis of _GUSA_ transcripts from leaves wounded at different time points showed that _OMG1_ promoter activity heightens immediately after wounding and dissipates after 30 min ([Fig. 3C](#F3)).

### OMG1 regulates the expression of MYB77 and GRX480 known to be induced in spaceflight and upon wounding

Eight genes **\[see**[**Supporting Information—Table S2**](#sup1)**\]** were used to elucidate potential functional interactions with OMG1. Since _OMG1_ promoter activity was shown to rise immediately after wounding ([Fig. 3C](#F3)), a wounding time course of mock, immediate, 10 min and 1 h was used to screen the expression of the genes listed in [**Supporting Information—Table S2**](#sup1) that could be affected by knocking out _OMG1_. Two genes, _GRX480_ (At1g28480) and _MYB77_ (At3g50060), out of eight genes tested showed significant differences (Student’s _t_\-test _P_ < 0.05) in gene expression between WT and _omg1_ lines ([Fig. 4D](#F4) and [F](#F4)). The expression of _GRX480_ was repressed after wounding in the _omg1_ line and did not increase as did the WT line. On the other hand, _MYB77_ expressed in the _omg1_ line showed a significant delay in down-regulating gene expression when compared to the WT at the 10-min post-wounding time point. MYB77 and GRX480 were significantly differentially expressed between Col-0 and WS ([Fig. 5](#F5)). Col-0 showed a median fold change of 1.7 and WS showed a 3-fold increase in _MYB77_ expression in spaceflight relative to ground controls ([Fig. 5A](#F5)). In the _GRX480_ analyses, Col-0 showed a median fold change of 0.3 and WS showed a median fold change of 1.3 in spaceflight relative to ground controls ([Fig. 5B](#F5)).

### ROS accumulation upon wounding and flg22 induction is altered in _omg1_ KO leaves compared to Col-0 leaves

Wild-type Col-0, _omg1_ and respiratory burst oxidase homology D (_rbohd_) KO plants, which are delayed in ROS accumulation ([Miller _et al._ 2009](#CIT0053)), were subjected to mechanical wounding with a pipette tip. The production of hydroxyl, peroxyl and other ROS activity within the cells was measured with DCF-DA assay. Green fluorescence at the site of wounding was captured after 20 min with light microscopy. Wild-type Col-0 leaves produced ROS around the wound site, whereas neither _omg1_ nor _rbohd_ showed prominent production of ROS ([Fig. 6A](#F6)). Quantification of fluorescence using ImageJ showed significant differences (Student’s _t_\-test _P_ < 0.01) between Col-0 and the mutant lines ([Fig. 6B](#F6)).

Based on luminol ROS assays OMG1 affects the elicitor-induced generation of extracellular ROS. Flg22-induced hydrogen peroxide production by leaf discs of _omg1_ mutants was ~20 % higher compared to Col-0. Water-treated controls along with the _rbohd_ leaf discs showed no production of flg22-induced H2O2 ([Fig. 6C](#F6)). Since elicitor-induced extracellular ROS is governed by _RbohD_, the measurement of _RbohD_ expression between Col-0 and _omg1_ lines in a wounding time course was analysed ([Fig. 6D](#F6)). The relative expression of _RbohD_ showed no significant difference between WT and _omg1_ leaves.

### OMG1 is a member of the CONSTANS-Like protein family

The predicted _OMG1_ gene encodes a 369 amino acid protein that contains a C-terminal 43 amino acid sequence that is 84 % sequence similarity to the (CONSTANS (CO), CONSTANS-Like (COL) and TIMING OF CAB EXPRESSION1 (TOC1)) ‘CCT’ domain ([Berardini _et al._ 2015](#CIT0003)). OMG1 also contains two divergent B-box domains in the N-terminal region **\[see**[**Supporting Information—Fig. S2**](#sup1)**\]**. The OMG1 B-box1 domain has 51 % similarity to the B-box1 consensus sequence, and the OMG1 B-box2 domain has a 94 % similarity to the B-box2 consensus sequence ([Griffiths _et al._ 2003](#CIT0020); [Masaki _et al._ 2005](#CIT0050); [Gangappa and Botto 2014](#CIT0017)).

A consensus phylogeny suggests that OMG1 belongs to group II of the CO and COL family of transcriptional regulators ([Fig. 6](#F6)). Maximum likelihood phylogenies placed a clade of OMG1-related sequences from Brassicas and Monocots (SH-like aLRT > 0.989) close to COL11-12 sequences from across flowering plants **\[see**[**Supporting Information—Table S3**](#sup1)**\]**. OMG1 appears closely related to the COL11-12 and COL9-10 lineages, although the precise placement of the OMG1 group remains unresolved.

Both the OMG1 and the COL11-12 clades consist of sequences representing both monocots and dicots. In the consensus tree, a single COL11-12-like sequence from the basal flowering plant _Amborella trichopoda_ rooted the OMG1 and COL11-12 clades (SH-like aLRT > 0.912), suggesting that the OMG1 lineage arose via a gene-duplication event in flowering plants, prior to the divergence of monocots and dicots ([Fig. 7](#F7)). However, no OMG1-related sequences from Eudicots were observed outside the Brassicaceae family, suggesting that either OMG1 was lost from non-Brassica dicots, or the sequence has diverged so much in these lineages as to be unrecognizable. The different alignment and tree-reconstruction procedures support the early-duplication hypothesis, and make it unlikely that the grouping of monocot and dicot OMG1-related sequences is a phylogenetic artefact.

The high level of sequence divergence in the OMG1 B-box1 domain is primarily due to a 13-amino acid deletion close to the start of the B-box1 consensus sequence CX-------------XAXLCX2CDX3H ([Fig. 7](#F7)). This B-box1 deletion was observed across several _Brassica_ sequences nested within the OMG1 clade, but this deletion was not found in monocot OMG1, suggesting it probably occurred late in the Brassicaceae lineage. Although the OMG1 B-box2 domain is largely conserved ([Fig. 8](#F8)), two highly conserved consensus amino acids are different in OMG1 compared to the consensus sequence CX2CX7-10CX7CX2CX5-12H. The third cysteine in the consensus sequence is serine in OMG1 (C49S), and the histidine at the end of the consensus sequence is leucine (H73L). Examination of B-box2 domains outside the OMG1 clade suggests that these substitutions are unique to the OMG1 clade **\[see**[**Supporting Information—Fig. S3**](#sup1)**\]**.

The B-box domain family belongs to a subgroup of zinc-binding proteins stabilized by canonical cysteine-rich zinc-finger motifs ([Klug and Schwabe 1995](#CIT0036)). The inferred structure of Zn-bound OMG1 B-box2 suggests that OMG1 is capable of stably binding at least one zinc ion, via a canonical zinc-finger motif ([Fig. 9](#F9)). In the model, four conserved cysteine residues surrounding the CX2C configuration were spatially positioned in a similar fashion as the amino acids surrounding the first Zn-binding site in the human MID1 template, suggesting this first OMG1 Zn-binding site retains a canonical zinc-finger structure.

However, radical substitutions at key Zn-binding sites (C49S, E52Q, C67I and H73L) occurring in the second Zn-binding pocket of OMG1’s B-box2 motif appear to completely disrupt potential Zn-binding ([Fig. 9](#F9)). It remains unclear whether the series of indels and substitutions after the OMG1 B-box2 domain could result in a novel structure that facilitates zinc ion binding or a different functional motif. Furthermore, sequences within the OMG1 clade show similar substitutions at most of these conserved Zn-binding residues, implicating the possibility that functional B-box2 in these proteins require only a single Zn ion **\[see**[**Supporting Information—Fig. S3**](#sup1)**\]**.

### OMG1 localizes to the nucleus

The transient expression of a 35S::OMG1-eGFP fusion protein in tobacco leaves indicates that OMG1 localizes in the nucleus. The highly conserved CCT domain in OMG1 has been associated with important functions in transcriptional regulation, DNA binding and nuclear localization ([Robson _et al._ 2001](#CIT0069); [Yan _et al._ 2011](#CIT0087); [Gendron _et al._ 2012](#CIT0019)). Cells transformed with 35S::eGFP alone displayed a uniform expression of eGFP throughout the leaf pavement cells in the vacuoles, nucleus and membrane. However, cells transformed with 35S::OMG1-eGFP fusion were specifically localized to the nucleus, as indicated by the DAPI nuclei-specific counter stain ([Fig. 10](#F10)).

## Discussion

As sessile organisms, plants have developed sensitive, adaptive strategies to regulate their metabolism in a changing environment ([Noctor _et al._ 2007](#CIT0056); [Schwarzländer and Finkemeier 2012](#CIT0073)). A strategy to avoid oxidative damage relies on the ability to deploy different antioxidants and ROS-scavenging/detoxifying enzymes to efficiently adjust their redox states. When subjected to the novel environment of spaceflight, plants respond by overexpressing more ROS- or redox-associated genes than comparable plants on the ground ([Im _et al._ 2011](#CIT0027); [Paul _et al._ 2012b](#CIT0065), [2013b](#CIT0066), [2017](#CIT0063); [Correll _et al._ 2013](#CIT0008); [Sugimoto _et al._ 2014](#CIT0080)). ROS in its various forms and subcellular production sites can elicit distinct and diverse physiological, biochemical and molecular responses ([Mittler _et al._ 2004](#CIT0054); [Gadjev _et al._ 2006](#CIT0015); [Swanson and Gilroy 2010](#CIT0082); [Suzuki _et al._ 2012](#CIT0081)). It is possible that plants drew from diverse ROS response strategies to cope with spaceflight, an environment that is outside their evolutionary experience and therefore potentially stressful. The data presented here suggest that _OMG1_ is a putative regulator of the ROS signalling pathway associated with wounding and may play a prominent role in regulating the spaceflight ROS response, especially in the WS ecotype where it is strongly induced by spaceflight.

### Spaceflight induces the differential expression of ROS-producing genes in an ecotype-dependent manner

In general, the differentially expressed genes in spaceflight showed a positive correlation to genes producing ROS ([Fig. 1A](#F1)). Although it is known that ecotype differences can diversify the ROS signatures associated with stress responses on Earth ([Kalbina and Strid 2006](#CIT0033); [Li _et al._ 2006](#CIT0045), [2008](#CIT0043)), these results are the first to demonstrate that different ecotypes use different specific subcellular ROS species to respond to the spaceflight environment ([Fig. 1](#F1)).

Previous morphological differences between Col-0 and WS ecotypes in the spaceflight environment were primarily observed in the roots. Although the overall root length at 11 days on orbit between the two ecotypes showed no significant difference ([Paul _et al._ 2017](#CIT0063)), it was noted that the Col-0 ecotype showed a dramatic lag in root development during the first 48-h post-germination in orbit when compared to the WS ecotype, and that there are also ecotype-specific differences in root growth behaviour ([Paul _et al._ 2012a](#CIT0060)). One difference between the Col-0 and WS ecotypes is the regulation of class III peroxidase genes ([Passardi _et al._ 2007](#CIT0059)). In fact, two genes _PE10_ (AT1G49570) and _PE59_ (AT5G19890) that were up-regulated in the APEX03-2 Col-0 but remained unchanged in APEX03-2 WS ([Fig. 1B](#F1)) are involved in controlling the root cell elongation process ([Markakis _et al._ 2012](#CIT0049)). The differentially expressed peroxidase genes between the two ecotypes in the APEX03-2 spaceflight transcriptomes ([Fig. 1B](#F1)) reinforce the notion that different ecotypes utilize ROS differently to respond to their environment and suggest that in WS, these genes were already at a level appropriate for spaceflight acclimation and were therefore unchanged. In addition, the observed down-regulation of peroxidases in Col-0 was consonant with observations previously published ([Kwon _et al._ 2015](#CIT0038)). Since peroxidases are necessary for the general oxidoreduction of H2O2 in general, the down-regulation of peroxidases in spaceflight within Col-0 could contribute to Col-0-specific ROS signatures seen in clusters A and B of the ROSMETER analyses ([Fig. 1A](#F1)).

The current ROSMETER analysis is not intended to define how specific ecotypes utilize peroxidases or regulate specific ROS indices in response to spaceflight. Rather, it is to illustrate that the genetic background of the spaceflight-grown plant had a substantial impact on the specific subcellular ROS species that were used in the physiological response.

### OMG1 transcript is consistently up-regulated in WS ecotype across multiple spaceflight experiments and is induced rapidly upon wounding in both WS and Col-0

_OMG1_ is consistently induced in spaceflight in WS but not Col-0. Comparisons of the 5′ upstream region, the coding region and the 3′ UTR of _OMG1_ between the two ecotypes showed no differences in the primary sequence. However, in the intergenic region downstream of the _OMG1_ stop codon, a point mutation is observed at positions 2197, 3327, and a two-nucleotide deletion is observed at position 3488 **\[see**[**Supporting Information—Fig. S4**](#sup1)**\]**.

Wassilewskija and Col-0 do regulate _OMG1_ differently. _OMG1_ showed slight differences in basal expression between Col-0 and WS, and both ecotypes demonstrated immediate up-regulation of _OMG1_ after wounding, along with the rapid diminishing of the signal afterwards **\[see**[**Supporting Information—Fig. S5A**](#sup1)**\]**. However, Col-0 and WS responded very differently in a wounding dosage test, where leaves were subjected to various degrees of damage at the onset of wounding (‘immediate’ time point) **\[see**[**Supporting Information—Fig. S5B**](#sup1)**\]**. Irrespective of the extent of the wounded surface area of the leaf, Col-0 expressed _OMG1_ at a consistent level, whereas WS expressed _OMG1_ in a dose-response manner **\[see**[**Supporting Information—Fig. S5C**](#sup1)**\]**. These results suggest that OMG1 is involved in a rapid wounding response in both Col-0 and WS ecotypes but with different modes of regulation.

The WS and Col-0 ecotypes are genotypically distinct, and their transcriptomic responses to environmental and developmental cues can be dissimilar (e.g. [Chen _et al._ 2005](#CIT0004); [Kusunoki _et al._ 2017](#CIT0037)). The overall spaceflight transcriptomes of WS and Col-0 are dramatically different ([Paul _et al._ 2017](#CIT0063)). It is hypothesized that even though OMG1 is functional in both ecotypes upon wounding, other gene products or pathways present in Col-0 but not WS could compensate for the ‘need’ for OMG1 in space, or that these genes were already at a level appropriate for spaceflight acclimation and were therefore unchanged in the spaceflight transcriptome. Although OMG1’s role in the physiological adaptation of WS to spaceflight has yet to be discerned, its strong induction suggests that OMG1 contributes to a successful adjustment to that environment. Irrespective of OMG1’s specific role in spaceflight physiology, it is noteworthy that OMG1’s overall metabolic function, which was previously unknown, was only discovered because of its role in spaceflight physiology.

### OMG1 is associated with the regulation of ROS

_OMG1_ is associated with ROS regulation. The location of _OMG1_ promoter region activity coincided with regions of dynamic ROS activity. _OMG1_ specifically regulated the expression of two ROS-associated genes (_GRX480_ and _MYB77_). And, loss of OMG1 protein in _omg1_ resulted in deviations from WT in two different ROS assays.

The rapid induction of _OMG1_ expression immediately after wounding was observed with a promoter-driven GUS reporter qRT-PCR analysis. Rapid induction of transcription (prior to 2-min post-stimulus) has been observed in gravitational and mechanical stimulation of _Arabidopsis_ root apical tissues ([Kimbrough _et al._ 2004](#CIT0035)). In addition, wounding _Arabidopsis_ leaves produces ROS within minutes at the wound site ([Miller _et al._ 2009](#CIT0053); [Beneloujaephajri _et al._ 2013](#CIT0002)) and this rapid response is necessary for plants to elicit immediate defence/repair mechanisms against herbivore and pathogen attacks. Wounded plants can transmit rapid RBOHD-dependent ROS signals of speeds up to 8.4 cm min−1 to mediate long-distance cell-to-cell communication ([Miller _et al._ 2009](#CIT0053)). However, since no statistical differences were seen in the expression level of _RbohD_ in Col-0 WT plants and _omg1_ KO plants ([Fig. 6D](#F6)), this suggests that the changes in extracellular or intracellular ROS are not a result of altered expression of _RbohD_ in the _omg1_ KO line.

Reactive oxygen species molecules are essential signalling molecules in plant growth and development but can also act as toxic stressors. Therefore, there exists an elaborate and highly redundant network of genes that maintain the delicate ROS homeostasis ([Gechev _et al._ 2006](#CIT0018)). Functional OMG1 is necessary for rapid generation of intracellular ROS at the wound site ([Fig. 6A](#F6) and [B](#F6)). However, over time these ROS return to WT levels, presumably facilitated by other genes of redundant function **\[see**[**Supporting Information—Fig. S6**](#sup1)**\]**.

In a recent review, it has been suggested that altered ROS signalling in response to the spaceflight environment could affect plant growth and development indirectly via changes in hormonal influx within the plants ([Schüler _et al._ 2015](#CIT0071)). OMG1 was found to regulate the expression of ROS-associated genes _GRX480_ and _MYB77_. GRX480/GRXC9 is a member of the glutaredoxin (GRX) family of small redox enzymes. GRX480 is a salicylic acid (SA)-responsive gene induced quickly and transiently by an NPR1-independent pathway, which is associated with the ROS-scavenging/antioxidant network ([Laporte _et al._ 2012](#CIT0040); [Zander _et al._ 2012](#CIT0090); [Herrera-Vásquez _et al._ 2015a](#CIT0023); [Huang _et al._ 2016](#CIT0026)). _MYB77_ is a member of the R2R3-type transcription factor family that is involved in ROS metabolism through the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade. The MAPK cascade is also known to play a role in plant development and hormone signalling and includes hormones such as jasmonic acid (JA), SA and ethylene (ET) ([Shin and Schachtman 2004](#CIT0077); [Teige _et al._ 2004](#CIT0083); [Galvez-Valdivieso _et al._ 2009](#CIT0016); [Herrera-Vásquez _et al._ 2015b](#CIT0024)).

OMG1’s role in ROS signalling was established with two frequently used ROS biochemical assays. The DCF-DA assay showed that intracellular ROS production around the wound site was dampened in the _omg1_ mutant, whereas flg22-induced extracellular ROS production was 20 % higher than WT in the _omg1_ mutant. These conflicting results can be addressed by the different signalling pathways elicited by each stimulus. Responses to mechanical damage can be localized, systemic or both. In any case, the response involves the generation, translocation, perception and transduction of wound signals to activate the expression of wound‐inducible genes. In response to mechanical wounding, the central role for JA signalling is well established. However, many other compounds, such as oligopeptide systemin, oligosaccharides, phytohormones, hydraulic pressure or electrical pulses, have also been proposed to play a role in wound signalling ([León _et al._ 2001](#CIT0042)). Early localized ROS induced by wounding, specifically O2•−, H2O2 and singlet oxygen, have been suggested to originate intracellularly from the photosynthetic electron transport chain in chloroplasts ([Morker and Roberts 2011](#CIT0055)).

On the other hand, flg22, a microbe-associated molecular pattern (MAMP), elicits an early response that includes SA-, JA- and ET-defence signalling pathways. Flg22 also elicits a late response that includes activation of defence-related senescence processes, SA-dependent secretory pathway genes and pathogenesis-related protein 1 (_PR1_) expression ([Denoux _et al._ 2008](#CIT0011)). MAMP-induced ROS have been shown to originate from the apoplast through activation of NADPH oxidases as well as peroxidases ([Jwa and Hwang 2017](#CIT0032)). Although there are crosstalks between signalling pathways induced by mechanical wounding and flg22, there are also unique pathways induced by each stimulus that could attribute to the different results observed. Details of these mechanisms are still being investigated; however, the results infer that within the Brassicaceae family OMG1 does play a role in the ROS signalling pathway.

### Phylogeny and protein architecture of OMG1

Prior to this study, members of the _Arabidopsis_ CO and COL family were thought to only function in photoperiod signalling that involves flowering, circadian rhythms, stomata opening and root-shoot branching ([Gangappa and Botto 2014](#CIT0017)). Evidence presented here suggests that members of this family play a role in ROS signalling. This, in turn, could aid in the functional characterization of many of the other uncharacterized members such as COL11 and COL12. We suggest that divergent function of OMG1 can be attributed to the evolved B-box1 and B-box2 domains. This is in line with reports on the rapid evolution of COL genes within the Brassicaceae, in which the increased evolutionary rates were observed not only in the middle region of the protein but also in the conserved zinc-finger and basic CCT regions ([Lagercrantz and Axelsson 2000](#CIT0039)).

## Conclusion

OMG1 is a CCT domain transcriptional regulator of ROS homeostasis, one that is important to the physiological adaptation of _Arabidopsis_ ecotype WS to spaceflight. While investigations are underway to determine the detailed mechanisms of how OMG1 regulates the ROS homeostasis in wounding, and its specific role in spaceflight, the results presented here demonstrate several important concepts for general consideration. First, spaceflight experiments are useful platforms to discover novel gene functions and provide fundamental insights into terrestrial plant biology. Second, the response to spaceflight is genotype-specific and this understanding should be taken into consideration when defining the overall plant spaceflight response. WS and Col-0 differ in induction of OMG1 in spaceflight. Third, the maintenance of ROS homeostasis plays an important role as plants physiologically adapt to spaceflight. And, last, the CONSTANS-Like family contains members that function well beyond the clock and timing roles typically associated with CCT domains, including ROS signalling.

## Sources of Funding

This work was supported by NASA - Space Life and Physical Sciences (NNX09AL96G, NNX07AH270, NNX12AN69G and NNX14AT24G awarded to R.J.F. and A.-L.P.).

## Contributions by the Authors

N.J.S. designed and conducted the ROS and OMG1-related experiments, analysed the transcriptome data, and wrote the first drafts of the manuscript. B.K. made substantial contributions to the phylogenetic analyses. A.-L.P. and R.J.F. supervised the work, designed and conducted the spaceflight transcriptome experiments, and revised the manuscript.

## Conflict of Interest

None declared.

## Supporting Information

The following additional information is available in the online version of this article—

[**Table S1**](#sup1) . List of all the primer pairs used in experiments presented in this paper.

[**Table S2**](#sup1) . List of genes shared between spaceflight, rapid wounding and pollen tube growth transcriptomic data sets.

[**Table S3**](#sup1) . List of all unique plant species represented in the phylogenetic analysis.

[**Figure S1**](#sup1) . Characterization of the _omg1_ homozygous knockout (KO) line (SALK\_045742C).

[**Figure S2**](#sup1) . Full-length sequence of _Arabidopsis_ OMG1 aligned to _Arabidopsis_ COL11-12 and the basal species _Amborella trichopoda_.

[**Figure S3**](#sup1) . B-box2 domain sequence in all species within the OMG1 clade.

[**Figure S4**](#sup1) . Alignment details of OMG1 in Wassilewskija (WS) vs. Columbia (Col-0) cultivar.

[**Figure S5**](#sup1) . Characterization of OMG1 expression in wild-type (WT) Wassilewskija (WS) and WT Columbia (Col-0) with qRT-PCR analysis upon wounding experiments.

[**Figure S6**](#sup1) . Time course of the 5-(and 6)-carboxy-2′,7′-dichloro dihydrofluorescein diacetate (DCF-DA) fluorescent reactive oxygen species (ROS) assay described in [Fig. 5](#F5).

Supplementary Material

## Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank the members of the UF Space Plants Laboratory for general support and useful discussions throughout the development of this manuscript.

## Literature Cited

1.  Beneloujaephajri E, Costa A, L’Haridon F, Métraux JP, Binda M. 2013. Production of reactive oxygen species and wound-induced resistance in _Arabidopsis thaliana_ against _Botrytis cinerea_ are preceded and depend on a burst of calcium. BMC Plant Biology 13:160. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2229-13-160)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4016300/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24134148/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=BMC%20Plant%20Biology&title=Production%20of%20reactive%20oxygen%20species%20and%20wound-induced%20resistance%20in%20Arabidopsis%20thaliana%20against%20Botrytis%20cinerea%20are%20preceded%20and%20depend%20on%20a%20burst%20of%20calcium&author=E%20Beneloujaephajri&author=A%20Costa&author=F%20L%E2%80%99Haridon&author=JP%20M%C3%A9traux&author=M%20Binda&volume=13&publication_year=2013&pages=160&pmid=24134148&doi=10.1186/1471-2229-13-160&)\]
2.  Berardini TZ, Reiser L, Li D, Mezheritsky Y, Muller R, Strait E, Huala E. 2015. The _Arabidopsis_ information resource: making and mining the “gold standard” annotated reference plant genome. Genesis 53:474–485. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/dvg.22877)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4545719/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26201819/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genesis&title=The%20Arabidopsis%20information%20resource:%20making%20and%20mining%20the%20%E2%80%9Cgold%20standard%E2%80%9D%20annotated%20reference%20plant%20genome&author=TZ%20Berardini&author=L%20Reiser&author=D%20Li&author=Y%20Mezheritsky&author=R%20Muller&volume=53&publication_year=2015&pages=474-485&pmid=26201819&doi=10.1002/dvg.22877&)\]
3.  Chen WJ, Chang SH, Hudson ME, Kwan WK, Li J, Estes B, Knoll D, Shi L, Zhu T. 2005. Contribution of transcriptional regulation to natural variations in _Arabidopsis_. Genome Biology 6:R32. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/gb-2005-6-4-r32)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1088960/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15833119/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genome%20Biology&title=Contribution%20of%20transcriptional%20regulation%20to%20natural%20variations%20in%20Arabidopsis&author=WJ%20Chen&author=SH%20Chang&author=ME%20Hudson&author=WK%20Kwan&author=J%20Li&volume=6&publication_year=2005&pages=R32&pmid=15833119&doi=10.1186/gb-2005-6-4-r32&)\]
4.  Chiu W, Niwa Y, Zeng W, Hirano T, Kobayashi H, Sheen J. 1996. Engineered GFP as a vital reporter in plants. Current Biology 6:325–330. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0960-9822\(02\)00483-9)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8805250/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Current%20Biology&title=Engineered%20GFP%20as%20a%20vital%20reporter%20in%20plants&author=W%20Chiu&author=Y%20Niwa&author=W%20Zeng&author=T%20Hirano&author=H%20Kobayashi&volume=6&publication_year=1996&pages=325-330&pmid=8805250&doi=10.1016/s0960-9822\(02\)00483-9&)\]
5.  Chung HJ, Ferl RJ. 1999. _Arabidopsis_ alcohol dehydrogenase expression in both shoots and roots is conditioned by root growth environment. Plant Physiology 121:429–436. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.121.2.429)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC59405/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10517834/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Physiology&title=Arabidopsis%20alcohol%20dehydrogenase%20expression%20in%20both%20shoots%20and%20roots%20is%20conditioned%20by%20root%20growth%20environment&author=HJ%20Chung&author=RJ%20Ferl&volume=121&publication_year=1999&pages=429-436&pmid=10517834&doi=10.1104/pp.121.2.429&)\]
6.  Clough SJ, Bent AF. 1998. Floral dip: a simplified method for _Agrobacterium_\-mediated transformation of _Arabidopsis thaliana_. The Plant Journal 16:735–743. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-313x.1998.00343.x)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10069079/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=The%20Plant%20Journal&title=Floral%20dip:%20a%20simplified%20method%20for%20Agrobacterium-mediated%20transformation%20of%20Arabidopsis%20thaliana&author=SJ%20Clough&author=AF%20Bent&volume=16&publication_year=1998&pages=735-743&pmid=10069079&doi=10.1046/j.1365-313x.1998.00343.x&)\]
7.  Correll MJ, Pyle TP, Millar KD, Sun Y, Yao J, Edelmann RE, Kiss JZ. 2013. Transcriptome analyses of _Arabidopsis thaliana_ seedlings grown in space: implications for gravity-responsive genes. Planta 238:519–533. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00425-013-1909-x)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23771594/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Planta&title=Transcriptome%20analyses%20of%20Arabidopsis%20thaliana%20seedlings%20grown%20in%20space:%20implications%20for%20gravity-responsive%20genes&author=MJ%20Correll&author=TP%20Pyle&author=KD%20Millar&author=Y%20Sun&author=J%20Yao&volume=238&publication_year=2013&pages=519-533&pmid=23771594&doi=10.1007/s00425-013-1909-x&)\]
8.  Cowles JR, Scheld HW, Lemay R, Peterson C. 1984. Growth and lignification in seedlings exposed to eight days of microgravity. Annals of Botany 54:33–48. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.aob.a086865)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11539752/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Annals%20of%20Botany&title=Growth%20and%20lignification%20in%20seedlings%20exposed%20to%20eight%20days%20of%20microgravity&author=JR%20Cowles&author=HW%20Scheld&author=R%20Lemay&author=C%20Peterson&volume=54&publication_year=1984&pages=33-48&pmid=11539752&doi=10.1093/oxfordjournals.aob.a086865&)\]
9.  Denoux C, Galletti R, Mammarella N, Gopalan S, Werck D, De Lorenzo G, Ferrari S, Ausubel FM, Dewdney J. 2008. Activation of defense response pathways by OGs and Flg22 elicitors in _Arabidopsis_ seedlings. Molecular Plant 1:423–445. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/mp/ssn019)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2954645/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19825551/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Molecular%20Plant&title=Activation%20of%20defense%20response%20pathways%20by%20OGs%20and%20Flg22%20elicitors%20in%20Arabidopsis%20seedlings&author=C%20Denoux&author=R%20Galletti&author=N%20Mammarella&author=S%20Gopalan&author=D%20Werck&volume=1&publication_year=2008&pages=423-445&pmid=19825551&doi=10.1093/mp/ssn019&)\]
10.  Do CB, Mahabhashyam MS, Brudno M, Batzoglou S. 2005. ProbCons: probabilistic consistency-based multiple sequence alignment. Genome Research 15:330–340. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.2821705)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC546535/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15687296/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genome%20Research&title=ProbCons:%20probabilistic%20consistency-based%20multiple%20sequence%20alignment&author=CB%20Do&author=MS%20Mahabhashyam&author=M%20Brudno&author=S%20Batzoglou&volume=15&publication_year=2005&pages=330-340&pmid=15687296&doi=10.1101/gr.2821705&)\]
11.  Edgar RC. 2004. MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and high throughput. Nucleic Acids Research 32:1792–1797. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkh340)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC390337/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15034147/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nucleic%20Acids%20Research&title=MUSCLE:%20multiple%20sequence%20alignment%20with%20high%20accuracy%20and%20high%20throughput&author=RC%20Edgar&volume=32&publication_year=2004&pages=1792-1797&pmid=15034147&doi=10.1093/nar/gkh340&)\]
12.  Ferl RJ, Koh J, Denison F, Paul A-L. 2014. Spaceflight induces specific alterations in the proteomes of _Arabidopsis_. Astrobiology 15:32–56. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1089/ast.2014.1210)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4290804/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25517942/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Astrobiology&title=Spaceflight%20induces%20specific%20alterations%20in%20the%20proteomes%20of%20Arabidopsis&author=RJ%20Ferl&author=J%20Koh&author=F%20Denison&author=A-L%20Paul&volume=15&publication_year=2014&pages=32-56&pmid=25517942&doi=10.1089/ast.2014.1210&)\]
13.  Ferl RJ, Paul A-L. 2016. The effect of spaceflight on the gravity-sensing auxin gradient of roots: GFP reporter gene microscopy on orbit. Npj Microgravity 2:15023. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/npjmgrav.2015.23)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5515520/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28725721/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Npj%20Microgravity&title=The%20effect%20of%20spaceflight%20on%20the%20gravity-sensing%20auxin%20gradient%20of%20roots:%20GFP%20reporter%20gene%20microscopy%20on%20orbit&author=RJ%20Ferl&author=A-L%20Paul&volume=2&publication_year=2016&pages=15023&pmid=28725721&doi=10.1038/npjmgrav.2015.23&)\]
14.  Gadjev I, Vanderauwera S, Gechev TS, Laloi C, Minkov IN, Shulaev V, Apel K, Inzé D, Mittler R, Van Breusegem F. 2006. Transcriptomic footprints disclose specificity of reactive oxygen species signaling in _Arabidopsis_. Plant Physiology 141:436–445. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.106.078717)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1475436/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16603662/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Physiology&title=Transcriptomic%20footprints%20disclose%20specificity%20of%20reactive%20oxygen%20species%20signaling%20in%20Arabidopsis&author=I%20Gadjev&author=S%20Vanderauwera&author=TS%20Gechev&author=C%20Laloi&author=IN%20Minkov&volume=141&publication_year=2006&pages=436-445&pmid=16603662&doi=10.1104/pp.106.078717&)\]
15.  Galvez-Valdivieso G, Fryer MJ, Lawson T, Slattery K, Truman W, Smirnoff N, Asami T, Davies WJ, Jones AM, Baker NR, Mullineaux PM. 2009. The high light response in _Arabidopsis_ involves ABA signaling between vascular and bundle sheath cells. The Plant Cell 21:2143–2162. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.108.061507)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2729609/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19638476/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=The%20Plant%20Cell&title=The%20high%20light%20response%20in%20Arabidopsis%20involves%20ABA%20signaling%20between%20vascular%20and%20bundle%20sheath%20cells&author=G%20Galvez-Valdivieso&author=MJ%20Fryer&author=T%20Lawson&author=K%20Slattery&author=W%20Truman&volume=21&publication_year=2009&pages=2143-2162&pmid=19638476&doi=10.1105/tpc.108.061507&)\]
16.  Gangappa SN, Botto JF. 2014. The BBX family of plant transcription factors. Trends in Plant Science 19:460–470. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tplants.2014.01.010)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24582145/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Trends%20in%20Plant%20Science&title=The%20BBX%20family%20of%20plant%20transcription%20factors&author=SN%20Gangappa&author=JF%20Botto&volume=19&publication_year=2014&pages=460-470&pmid=24582145&doi=10.1016/j.tplants.2014.01.010&)\]
17.  Gechev TS, Van Breusegem F, Stone JM, Denev I, Laloi C. 2006. Reactive oxygen species as signals that modulate plant stress responses and programmed cell death. BioEssays 28:1091–1101. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/bies.20493)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17041898/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=BioEssays&title=Reactive%20oxygen%20species%20as%20signals%20that%20modulate%20plant%20stress%20responses%20and%20programmed%20cell%20death&author=TS%20Gechev&author=F%20Van%20Breusegem&author=JM%20Stone&author=I%20Denev&author=C%20Laloi&volume=28&publication_year=2006&pages=1091-1101&pmid=17041898&doi=10.1002/bies.20493&)\]
18.  Gendron JM, Pruneda-Paz JL, Doherty CJ, Gross AM, Kang SE, Kay SA. 2012. _Arabidopsis_ circadian clock protein, TOC1, is a DNA-binding transcription factor. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109:3167–3172. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1200355109)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3286946/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22315425/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proceedings%20of%20the%20National%20Academy%20of%20Sciences&title=Arabidopsis%20circadian%20clock%20protein,%20TOC1,%20is%20a%20DNA-binding%20transcription%20factor&author=JM%20Gendron&author=JL%20Pruneda-Paz&author=CJ%20Doherty&author=AM%20Gross&author=SE%20Kang&volume=109&publication_year=2012&pages=3167-3172&pmid=22315425&doi=10.1073/pnas.1200355109&)\]
19.  Griffiths S, Dunford RP, Coupland G, Laurie DA. 2003. The evolution of CONSTANS-like gene families in barley, rice, and _Arabidopsis_. Plant Physiology 131:1855–1867. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.102.016188)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC166942/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12692345/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Physiology&title=The%20evolution%20of%20CONSTANS-like%20gene%20families%20in%20barley,%20rice,%20and%20Arabidopsis&author=S%20Griffiths&author=RP%20Dunford&author=G%20Coupland&author=DA%20Laurie&volume=131&publication_year=2003&pages=1855-1867&pmid=12692345&doi=10.1104/pp.102.016188&)\]
20.  Herrera-Vásquez A, Carvallo L, Blanco F, Tobar M, Villarroel-Candia E, Vicente-Carbajosa J, Salinas P, Holuigue L. 2015a. Transcriptional control of glutaredoxin GRXC9 expression by a salicylic acid-dependent and NPR1-independent pathway in _Arabidopsis_. Plant Molecular Biology Reporter 33:624–637. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11105-014-0782-5)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4677692/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26696694/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Molecular%20Biology%20Reporter&title=Transcriptional%20control%20of%20glutaredoxin%20GRXC9%20expression%20by%20a%20salicylic%20acid-dependent%20and%20NPR1-independent%20pathway%20in%20Arabidopsis&author=A%20Herrera-V%C3%A1squez&author=L%20Carvallo&author=F%20Blanco&author=M%20Tobar&author=E%20Villarroel-Candia&volume=33&publication_year=2015a&pages=624-637&pmid=26696694&doi=10.1007/s11105-014-0782-5&)\]
21.  Herrera-Vásquez A, Salinas P, Holuigue L. 2015b. Salicylic acid and reactive oxygen species interplay in the transcriptional control of defense genes expression. Frontiers in Plant Science 6:171. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2015.00171)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4365548/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25852720/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Frontiers%20in%20Plant%20Science&title=Salicylic%20acid%20and%20reactive%20oxygen%20species%20interplay%20in%20the%20transcriptional%20control%20of%20defense%20genes%20expression&author=A%20Herrera-V%C3%A1squez&author=P%20Salinas&author=L%20Holuigue&volume=6&publication_year=2015b&pages=171&pmid=25852720&doi=10.3389/fpls.2015.00171&)\]
22.  Hill J, Davis KE. 2014. The Supertree Toolkit 2: a new and improved software package with a Graphical User Interface for supertree construction. Biodiversity Data Journal e1053. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3897/BDJ.2.e1053)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4031428/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24891820/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Biodiversity%20Data%20Journal&title=The%20Supertree%20Toolkit%202:%20a%20new%20and%20improved%20software%20package%20with%20a%20Graphical%20User%20Interface%20for%20supertree%20construction&author=J%20Hill&author=KE%20Davis&publication_year=2014&pages=e1053&pmid=24891820&doi=10.3897/BDJ.2.e1053&)\]
23.  Hoson T, Soga K, Mori R, Saiki M, Nakamura Y, Wakabayashi K, Kamisaka S. 2002. Stimulation of elongation growth and cell wall loosening in rice coleoptiles under microgravity conditions in space. Plant Cell Physiology 43:1067–1071. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/pcp/pcf126)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12354926/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Cell%20Physiology&title=Stimulation%20of%20elongation%20growth%20and%20cell%20wall%20loosening%20in%20rice%20coleoptiles%20under%20microgravity%20conditions%20in%20space&author=T%20Hoson&author=K%20Soga&author=R%20Mori&author=M%20Saiki&author=Y%20Nakamura&volume=43&publication_year=2002&pages=1067-1071&pmid=12354926&doi=10.1093/pcp/pcf126&)\]
24.  Huang LJ, Li N, Thurow C, Wirtz M, Hell R, Gatz C. 2016. Ectopically expressed glutaredoxin ROXY19 negatively regulates the detoxification pathway in _Arabidopsis thaliana_. BMC Plant Biology 16:200. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12870-016-0886-1)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5022239/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27624344/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=BMC%20Plant%20Biology&title=Ectopically%20expressed%20glutaredoxin%20ROXY19%20negatively%20regulates%20the%20detoxification%20pathway%20in%20Arabidopsis%20thaliana&author=LJ%20Huang&author=N%20Li&author=C%20Thurow&author=M%20Wirtz&author=R%20Hell&volume=16&publication_year=2016&pages=200&pmid=27624344&doi=10.1186/s12870-016-0886-1&)\]
25.  Im YJ, Killens R, Lee AY, Ji M, Lowder C, Grunden AM, Boss WF. 2011. Redesigning plants for spaceflight and beyond: transfer of genes from _Pyrococcus_. Gravitational Space Research 23:39. \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Gravitational%20Space%20Research&title=Redesigning%20plants%20for%20spaceflight%20and%20beyond:%20transfer%20of%20genes%20from%20Pyrococcus&author=YJ%20Im&author=R%20Killens&author=AY%20Lee&author=M%20Ji&author=C%20Lowder&volume=23&publication_year=2011&pages=39&)\]
26.  Jakic B, Buszko M, Cappellano G, Wick G. 2017. Elevated sodium leads to the increased expression of HSP60 and induces apoptosis in HUVECs. PLoS One 12:e0179383. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0179383)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5467851/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28604836/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20One&title=Elevated%20sodium%20leads%20to%20the%20increased%20expression%20of%20HSP60%20and%20induces%20apoptosis%20in%20HUVECs&author=B%20Jakic&author=M%20Buszko&author=G%20Cappellano&author=G%20Wick&volume=12&publication_year=2017&pages=e0179383&pmid=28604836&doi=10.1371/journal.pone.0179383&)\]
27.  Jefferson RA, Kavanagh TA, Bevan MW. 1987. GUS fusions: beta-glucuronidase as a sensitive and versatile gene fusion marker in higher plants. The EMBO Journal 6:3901–3907. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1460-2075.1987.tb02730.x)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC553867/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/3327686/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=The%20EMBO%20Journal&title=GUS%20fusions:%20beta-glucuronidase%20as%20a%20sensitive%20and%20versatile%20gene%20fusion%20marker%20in%20higher%20plants&author=RA%20Jefferson&author=TA%20Kavanagh&author=MW%20Bevan&volume=6&publication_year=1987&pages=3901-3907&pmid=3327686&doi=10.1002/j.1460-2075.1987.tb02730.x&)\]
28.  Joo JH, Bae YS, Lee JS. 2001. Role of auxin-induced reactive oxygen species in root gravitropism. Plant Physiology 126:1055–1060. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.126.3.1055)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC116462/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11457956/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Physiology&title=Role%20of%20auxin-induced%20reactive%20oxygen%20species%20in%20root%20gravitropism&author=JH%20Joo&author=YS%20Bae&author=JS%20Lee&volume=126&publication_year=2001&pages=1055-1060&pmid=11457956&doi=10.1104/pp.126.3.1055&)\]
29.  Jwa NS, Hwang BK. 2017. Convergent evolution of pathogen effectors toward reactive oxygen species signaling networks in plants. Frontiers in Plant Science 8:1687. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2017.01687)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5627460/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29033963/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Frontiers%20in%20Plant%20Science&title=Convergent%20evolution%20of%20pathogen%20effectors%20toward%20reactive%20oxygen%20species%20signaling%20networks%20in%20plants&author=NS%20Jwa&author=BK%20Hwang&volume=8&publication_year=2017&pages=1687&pmid=29033963&doi=10.3389/fpls.2017.01687&)\]
30.  Kalbina I, Strid A. 2006. Supplementary ultraviolet-B irradiation reveals differences in stress responses between _Arabidopsis thaliana_ ecotypes. Plant, Cell & Environment 29:754–763. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-3040.2005.01436.x)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17087460/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant,%20Cell%20&%20Environment&title=Supplementary%20ultraviolet-B%20irradiation%20reveals%20differences%20in%20stress%20responses%20between%20Arabidopsis%20thaliana%20ecotypes&author=I%20Kalbina&author=A%20Strid&volume=29&publication_year=2006&pages=754-763&pmid=17087460&doi=10.1111/j.1365-3040.2005.01436.x&)\]
31.  Katoh K, Standley DM. 2013. MAFFT multiple sequence alignment software version 7: improvements in performance and usability. Molecular Biology and Evolution 30:772–780. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/mst010)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3603318/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23329690/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Molecular%20Biology%20and%20Evolution&title=MAFFT%20multiple%20sequence%20alignment%20software%20version%207:%20improvements%20in%20performance%20and%20usability&author=K%20Katoh&author=DM%20Standley&volume=30&publication_year=2013&pages=772-780&pmid=23329690&doi=10.1093/molbev/mst010&)\]
32.  Kimbrough JM, Salinas-Mondragon R, Boss WF, Brown CS, Sederoff HW. 2004. The fast and transient transcriptional network of gravity and mechanical stimulation in the _Arabidopsis_ root apex. Plant Physiology 136:2790–2805. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.104.044594)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC523342/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15347791/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Physiology&title=The%20fast%20and%20transient%20transcriptional%20network%20of%20gravity%20and%20mechanical%20stimulation%20in%20the%20Arabidopsis%20root%20apex&author=JM%20Kimbrough&author=R%20Salinas-Mondragon&author=WF%20Boss&author=CS%20Brown&author=HW%20Sederoff&volume=136&publication_year=2004&pages=2790-2805&pmid=15347791&doi=10.1104/pp.104.044594&)\]
33.  Klug A, Schwabe JW. 1995. Protein motifs 5. Zinc fingers. FASEB Journal 9:597–604. \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7768350/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=FASEB%20Journal&title=Protein%20motifs%205.%20Zinc%20fingers&author=A%20Klug&author=JW%20Schwabe&volume=9&publication_year=1995&pages=597-604&pmid=7768350&)\]
34.  Kusunoki K, Nakano Y, Tanaka K, Sakata Y, Koyama H, Kobayashi Y. 2017. Transcriptomic variation among six _Arabidopsis thaliana_ accessions identified several novel genes controlling aluminium tolerance. Plant, Cell & Environment 40:249–263. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/pce.12866)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27861992/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant,%20Cell%20&%20Environment&title=Transcriptomic%20variation%20among%20six%20Arabidopsis%20thaliana%20accessions%20identified%20several%20novel%20genes%20controlling%20aluminium%20tolerance&author=K%20Kusunoki&author=Y%20Nakano&author=K%20Tanaka&author=Y%20Sakata&author=H%20Koyama&volume=40&publication_year=2017&pages=249-263&pmid=27861992&doi=10.1111/pce.12866&)\]
35.  Kwon T, Sparks JA, Nakashima J, Allen SN, Tang Y, Blancaflor EB. 2015. Transcriptional response of _Arabidopsis_ seedlings during spaceflight reveals peroxidase and cell wall remodeling genes associated with root hair development. American Journal of Botany 102:21–35. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3732/ajb.1400458)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25587145/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=American%20Journal%20of%20Botany&title=Transcriptional%20response%20of%20Arabidopsis%20seedlings%20during%20spaceflight%20reveals%20peroxidase%20and%20cell%20wall%20remodeling%20genes%20associated%20with%20root%20hair%20development&author=T%20Kwon&author=JA%20Sparks&author=J%20Nakashima&author=SN%20Allen&author=Y%20Tang&volume=102&publication_year=2015&pages=21-35&pmid=25587145&doi=10.3732/ajb.1400458&)\]
36.  Lagercrantz U, Axelsson T. 2000. Rapid evolution of the family of CONSTANS LIKE genes in plants. Molecular Biology and Evolution 17:1499–1507. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.molbev.a026249)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11018156/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Molecular%20Biology%20and%20Evolution&title=Rapid%20evolution%20of%20the%20family%20of%20CONSTANS%20LIKE%20genes%20in%20plants&author=U%20Lagercrantz&author=T%20Axelsson&volume=17&publication_year=2000&pages=1499-1507&pmid=11018156&doi=10.1093/oxfordjournals.molbev.a026249&)\]
37.  Laporte D, Olate E, Salinas P, Salazar M, Jordana X, Holuigue L. 2012. Glutaredoxin GRXS13 plays a key role in protection against photooxidative stress in _Arabidopsis_. Journal of Experimental Botany 63:503–515. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/err301)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3245481/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21963612/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Journal%20of%20Experimental%20Botany&title=Glutaredoxin%20GRXS13%20plays%20a%20key%20role%20in%20protection%20against%20photooxidative%20stress%20in%20Arabidopsis&author=D%20Laporte&author=E%20Olate&author=P%20Salinas&author=M%20Salazar&author=X%20Jordana&volume=63&publication_year=2012&pages=503-515&pmid=21963612&doi=10.1093/jxb/err301&)\]
38.  Lassig R, Gutermuth T, Bey TD, Konrad KR, Romeis T. 2014. Pollen tube NAD(P)H oxidases act as a speed control to dampen growth rate oscillations during polarized cell growth. The Plant Journal 78:94–106. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/tpj.12452)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24506280/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=The%20Plant%20Journal&title=Pollen%20tube%20NAD\(P\)H%20oxidases%20act%20as%20a%20speed%20control%20to%20dampen%20growth%20rate%20oscillations%20during%20polarized%20cell%20growth&author=R%20Lassig&author=T%20Gutermuth&author=TD%20Bey&author=KR%20Konrad&author=T%20Romeis&volume=78&publication_year=2014&pages=94-106&pmid=24506280&doi=10.1111/tpj.12452&)\]
39.  León J, Rojo E, Sánchez-Serrano JJ. 2001. Wound signalling in plants. Journal of Experimental Botany 52:1–9. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/jexbot/52.354.1)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11181708/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Journal%20of%20Experimental%20Botany&title=Wound%20signalling%20in%20plants&author=J%20Le%C3%B3n&author=E%20Rojo&author=JJ%20S%C3%A1nchez-Serrano&volume=52&publication_year=2001&pages=1-9&pmid=11181708&doi=10.1093/jexbot/52.354.1&)\]
40.  Li P, Ainsworth EA, Leakey AD, Ulanov A, Lozovaya V, Ort DR, Bohnert HJ. 2008. _Arabidopsis_ transcript and metabolite profiles: ecotype-specific responses to open-air elevated \[CO2\]. Plant, Cell & Environment 31:1673–1687. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-3040.2008.01874.x)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18721265/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant,%20Cell%20&%20Environment&title=Arabidopsis%20transcript%20and%20metabolite%20profiles:%20ecotype-specific%20responses%20to%20open-air%20elevated%20%5BCO2%5D&author=P%20Li&author=EA%20Ainsworth&author=AD%20Leakey&author=A%20Ulanov&author=V%20Lozovaya&volume=31&publication_year=2008&pages=1673-1687&pmid=18721265&doi=10.1111/j.1365-3040.2008.01874.x&)\]
41.  Li H, Lin Y, Heath RM, Zhu MX, Yang Z. 1999. Control of pollen tube tip growth by a rop GTPase-dependent pathway that leads to tip-localized calcium influx. The Plant Cell 11:1731–1742. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.11.9.1731)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC144310/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10488239/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=The%20Plant%20Cell&title=Control%20of%20pollen%20tube%20tip%20growth%20by%20a%20rop%20GTPase-dependent%20pathway%20that%20leads%20to%20tip-localized%20calcium%20influx&author=H%20Li&author=Y%20Lin&author=RM%20Heath&author=MX%20Zhu&author=Z%20Yang&volume=11&publication_year=1999&pages=1731-1742&pmid=10488239&doi=10.1105/tpc.11.9.1731&)\]
42.  Li P, Mane SP, Sioson AA, Robinet CV, Heath LS, Bohnert HJ, Grene R. 2006. Effects of chronic ozone exposure on gene expression in _Arabidopsis thaliana_ ecotypes and in _Thellungiella halophila_. Plant, Cell & Environment 29:854–868. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-3040.2005.01465.x)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17087469/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant,%20Cell%20&%20Environment&title=Effects%20of%20chronic%20ozone%20exposure%20on%20gene%20expression%20in%20Arabidopsis%20thaliana%20ecotypes%20and%20in%20Thellungiella%20halophila&author=P%20Li&author=SP%20Mane&author=AA%20Sioson&author=CV%20Robinet&author=LS%20Heath&volume=29&publication_year=2006&pages=854-868&pmid=17087469&doi=10.1111/j.1365-3040.2005.01465.x&)\]
43.  Liu Y, Schmidt B, Maskell DL. 2010. MSAProbs: multiple sequence alignment based on pair hidden Markov models and partition function posterior probabilities. Bioinformatics 26:1958–1964. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btq338)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20576627/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bioinformatics&title=MSAProbs:%20multiple%20sequence%20alignment%20based%20on%20pair%20hidden%20Markov%20models%20and%20partition%20function%20posterior%20probabilities&author=Y%20Liu&author=B%20Schmidt&author=DL%20Maskell&volume=26&publication_year=2010&pages=1958-1964&pmid=20576627&doi=10.1093/bioinformatics/btq338&)\]
44.  Marchler-Bauer A, Bryant H. 2004. CD-Search: protein domain annotations on the fly. Nucleic Acids Research 32:W327–W331. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkh454)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC441592/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15215404/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nucleic%20Acids%20Research&title=CD-Search:%20protein%20domain%20annotations%20on%20the%20fly&author=A%20Marchler-Bauer&author=H%20Bryant&volume=32&publication_year=2004&pages=W327-W331&pmid=15215404&doi=10.1093/nar/gkh454&)\]
45.  Marchler-Bauer A, Derbyshire MK, Gonzales NR, Lu S, Chitsaz F, Geer LY, Geer RC, He J, Gwadz M, Hurwitz DI, Lanczycki CJ, Lu F, Marchler GH, Song JS, Thanki N, Wang Z, Yamashita RA, Zhang D, Zheng C, Bryant SH. 2015. CDD: NCBI’s conserved domain database. Nucleic Acids Research 43:D222–D226. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gku1221)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4383992/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25414356/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nucleic%20Acids%20Research&title=CDD:%20NCBI%E2%80%99s%20conserved%20domain%20database&author=A%20Marchler-Bauer&author=MK%20Derbyshire&author=NR%20Gonzales&author=S%20Lu&author=F%20Chitsaz&volume=43&publication_year=2015&pages=D222-D226&pmid=25414356&doi=10.1093/nar/gku1221&)\]
46.  Markakis MN, De Cnodder T, Lewandowski M, Simon D, Boron A, Balcerowicz D, Doubbo T, Taconnat L, Renou JP, Höfte H, Verbelen JP, Vissenberg K. 2012. Identification of genes involved in the ACC-mediated control of root cell elongation in _Arabidopsis thaliana_. BMC Plant Biology 12:208. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2229-12-208)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3502322/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23134674/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=BMC%20Plant%20Biology&title=Identification%20of%20genes%20involved%20in%20the%20ACC-mediated%20control%20of%20root%20cell%20elongation%20in%20Arabidopsis%20thaliana&author=MN%20Markakis&author=T%20De%20Cnodder&author=M%20Lewandowski&author=D%20Simon&author=A%20Boron&volume=12&publication_year=2012&pages=208&pmid=23134674&doi=10.1186/1471-2229-12-208&)\]
47.  Masaki T, Tsukagoshi H, Mitsui N, Nishii T, Hattori T, Morikami A, Nakamura K. 2005. Activation tagging of a gene for a protein with novel class of CCT-domain activates expression of a subset of sugar-inducible genes in _Arabidopsis thaliana_. The Plant Journal 43:142–152. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-313X.2005.02439.x)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15960623/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=The%20Plant%20Journal&title=Activation%20tagging%20of%20a%20gene%20for%20a%20protein%20with%20novel%20class%20of%20CCT-domain%20activates%20expression%20of%20a%20subset%20of%20sugar-inducible%20genes%20in%20Arabidopsis%20thaliana&author=T%20Masaki&author=H%20Tsukagoshi&author=N%20Mitsui&author=T%20Nishii&author=T%20Hattori&volume=43&publication_year=2005&pages=142-152&pmid=15960623&doi=10.1111/j.1365-313X.2005.02439.x&)\]
48.  Mazars C, Brière C, Grat S, Pichereaux C, Rossignol M, Pereda-Loth V, Eche B, Boucheron-Dubuisson E, Le Disquet I, Medina FJ, Graziana A, Carnero-Diaz E. 2014. Microgravity induces changes in microsome-associated proteins of _Arabidopsis_ seedlings grown on board the international space station. PLoS One 9:e91814. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0091814)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3950288/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24618597/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20One&title=Microgravity%20induces%20changes%20in%20microsome-associated%20proteins%20of%20Arabidopsis%20seedlings%20grown%20on%20board%20the%20international%20space%20station&author=C%20Mazars&author=C%20Bri%C3%A8re&author=S%20Grat&author=C%20Pichereaux&author=M%20Rossignol&volume=9&publication_year=2014&pages=e91814&pmid=24618597&doi=10.1371/journal.pone.0091814&)\]
49.  Miller G, Schlauch K, Tam R, Cortes D, Torres MA, Shulaev V, Dangl JL, Mittler R. 2009. The plant NADPH oxidase RBOHD mediates rapid systemic signaling in response to diverse stimuli. Science Signaling 2:ra45. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/scisignal.2000448)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19690331/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Science%20Signaling&title=The%20plant%20NADPH%20oxidase%20RBOHD%20mediates%20rapid%20systemic%20signaling%20in%20response%20to%20diverse%20stimuli&author=G%20Miller&author=K%20Schlauch&author=R%20Tam&author=D%20Cortes&author=MA%20Torres&volume=2&publication_year=2009&pages=ra45&pmid=19690331&doi=10.1126/scisignal.2000448&)\]
50.  Mittler R, Vanderauwera S, Gollery M, Van Breusegem F. 2004. Reactive oxygen gene network of plants. Trends in Plant Science 9:490–498. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tplants.2004.08.009)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15465684/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Trends%20in%20Plant%20Science&title=Reactive%20oxygen%20gene%20network%20of%20plants&author=R%20Mittler&author=S%20Vanderauwera&author=M%20Gollery&author=F%20Van%20Breusegem&volume=9&publication_year=2004&pages=490-498&pmid=15465684&doi=10.1016/j.tplants.2004.08.009&)\]
51.  Morker KH, Roberts MR. 2011. Light as both an input and an output of wound-induced reactive oxygen formation in _Arabidopsis_ leaves. Plant Signaling & Behavior 6:1087–1089. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.4161/psb.6.8.15823)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3260698/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21822065/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Signaling%20&%20Behavior&title=Light%20as%20both%20an%20input%20and%20an%20output%20of%20wound-induced%20reactive%20oxygen%20formation%20in%20Arabidopsis%20leaves&author=KH%20Morker&author=MR%20Roberts&volume=6&publication_year=2011&pages=1087-1089&pmid=21822065&doi=10.4161/psb.6.8.15823&)\]
52.  NCBI Resource Coordinators 2016. Database resources of the National Center for Biotechnology Information. Nucleic Acids Research 44:D7–D19. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkv1290)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4702911/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26615191/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nucleic%20Acids%20Research&title=Database%20resources%20of%20the%20National%20Center%20for%20Biotechnology%20Information&author=%20NCBI%20Resource%20Coordinators&volume=44&publication_year=2016&pages=D7-D19&pmid=26615191&doi=10.1093/nar/gkv1290&)\]
53.  Nguyen N, Mirarab S, Warnow T. 2012. MRL and SuperFine+MRL: new supertree methods. Algorithms for Molecular Biology 7:3. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/1748-7188-7-3)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3308190/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22280525/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Algorithms%20for%20Molecular%20Biology&title=MRL%20and%20SuperFine+MRL:%20new%20supertree%20methods&author=N%20Nguyen&author=S%20Mirarab&author=T%20Warnow&volume=7&publication_year=2012&pages=3&pmid=22280525&doi=10.1186/1748-7188-7-3&)\]
54.  Noctor G, De Paepe R, Foyer CH. 2007. Mitochondrial redox biology and homeostasis in plants. Trends in Plant Science 12:125–134. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tplants.2007.01.005)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17293156/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Trends%20in%20Plant%20Science&title=Mitochondrial%20redox%20biology%20and%20homeostasis%20in%20plants&author=G%20Noctor&author=R%20De%20Paepe&author=CH%20Foyer&volume=12&publication_year=2007&pages=125-134&pmid=17293156&doi=10.1016/j.tplants.2007.01.005&)\]
55.  Obayashi T, Okamura Y, Ito S, Tadaka S, Aoki Y, Shirota M, Kinoshita K. 2014. ATTED-II in 2014: evaluation of gene coexpression in agriculturally important plants. Plant & Cell Physiology 55:e6. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/pcp/pct178)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3894708/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24334350/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20&%20Cell%20Physiology&title=ATTED-II%20in%202014:%20evaluation%20of%20gene%20coexpression%20in%20agriculturally%20important%20plants&author=T%20Obayashi&author=Y%20Okamura&author=S%20Ito&author=S%20Tadaka&author=Y%20Aoki&volume=55&publication_year=2014&pages=e6&pmid=24334350&doi=10.1093/pcp/pct178&)\]
56.  Passardi F, Dobias J, Valério L, Guimil S, Penel C, Dunand C. 2007. Morphological and physiological traits of three major _Arabidopsis thaliana_ accessions. Journal of Plant Physiology 164:980–992. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jplph.2006.06.008)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16904792/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Journal%20of%20Plant%20Physiology&title=Morphological%20and%20physiological%20traits%20of%20three%20major%20Arabidopsis%20thaliana%20accessions&author=F%20Passardi&author=J%20Dobias&author=L%20Val%C3%A9rio&author=S%20Guimil&author=C%20Penel&volume=164&publication_year=2007&pages=980-992&pmid=16904792&doi=10.1016/j.jplph.2006.06.008&)\]
57.  Paul AL, Amalfitano CE, Ferl RJ. 2012a. Plant growth strategies are remodeled by spaceflight. BMC Plant Biology 12:232. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2229-12-232)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3556330/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23217113/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=BMC%20Plant%20Biology&title=Plant%20growth%20strategies%20are%20remodeled%20by%20spaceflight&author=AL%20Paul&author=CE%20Amalfitano&author=RJ%20Ferl&volume=12&publication_year=2012a&pages=232&pmid=23217113&doi=10.1186/1471-2229-12-232&)\]
58.  Paul A-L, Popp MP, Gurley WB, Guy C, Norwood KL. Ferl RJ. 2005. _Arabidopsis_ gene expression patterns are altered during spaceflight. Advances in Space Research 36: 1175–1181. \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Advances%20in%20Space%20Research&title=Arabidopsis%20gene%20expression%20patterns%20are%20altered%20during%20spaceflight&author=A-L%20Paul&author=MP%20Popp&author=WB%20Gurley&author=C%20Guy&author=KL.%20Norwood&volume=36&publication_year=2005&pages=1175-1181&)\]
59.  Paul A-L, Sng NJ, Zupanska AK, Krishnamurthy A, Schultz ER, Ferl RJ. 2017. Genetic dissection of the _Arabidopsis_ spaceflight transcriptome: are some responses dispensable for the physiological adaptation of plants to spaceflight? PLoS One 12:e0180186. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0180186)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5491145/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28662188/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20One&title=Genetic%20dissection%20of%20the%20Arabidopsis%20spaceflight%20transcriptome:%20are%20some%20responses%20dispensable%20for%20the%20physiological%20adaptation%20of%20plants%20to%20spaceflight&author=A-L%20Paul&author=NJ%20Sng&author=AK%20Zupanska&author=A%20Krishnamurthy&author=ER%20Schultz&volume=12&publication_year=2017&pages=e0180186&pmid=28662188&doi=10.1371/journal.pone.0180186&)\]
60.  Paul A-L, Wheeler RM, Levine HG, Ferl RJ. 2013a. Fundamental plant biology enabled by the space shuttle. American Journal of Botany 100:226–234. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3732/ajb.1200338)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23281389/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=American%20Journal%20of%20Botany&title=Fundamental%20plant%20biology%20enabled%20by%20the%20space%20shuttle&author=A-L%20Paul&author=RM%20Wheeler&author=HG%20Levine&author=RJ%20Ferl&volume=100&publication_year=2013a&pages=226-234&pmid=23281389&doi=10.3732/ajb.1200338&)\]
61.  Paul A-L, Zupanska AK, Ostrow DT, Zhang Y, Sun Y, Li JL, Shanker S, Farmerie WG, Amalfitano CE, Ferl RJ. 2012b. Spaceflight transcriptomes: unique responses to a novel environment. Astrobiology 12:40–56. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1089/ast.2011.0696)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3264962/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22221117/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Astrobiology&title=Spaceflight%20transcriptomes:%20unique%20responses%20to%20a%20novel%20environment&author=A-L%20Paul&author=AK%20Zupanska&author=DT%20Ostrow&author=Y%20Zhang&author=Y%20Sun&volume=12&publication_year=2012b&pages=40-56&pmid=22221117&doi=10.1089/ast.2011.0696&)\]
62.  Paul A-L, Zupanska AK, Schultz ER, Ferl RJ. 2013b. Organ-specific remodeling of the _Arabidopsis_ transcriptome in response to spaceflight. BMC Plant Biology 13:112. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2229-13-112)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3750915/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23919896/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=BMC%20Plant%20Biology&title=Organ-specific%20remodeling%20of%20the%20Arabidopsis%20transcriptome%20in%20response%20to%20spaceflight&author=A-L%20Paul&author=AK%20Zupanska&author=ER%20Schultz&author=RJ%20Ferl&volume=13&publication_year=2013b&pages=112&pmid=23919896&doi=10.1186/1471-2229-13-112&)\]
63.  Pettersen EF, Goddard TD, Huang CC, Couch GS, Greenblatt DM, Meng EC, Ferrin TE. 2004. UCSF Chimera–a visualization system for exploratory research and analysis. Journal of Computational Chemistry 25:1605–1612. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcc.20084)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15264254/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Journal%20of%20Computational%20Chemistry&title=UCSF%20Chimera%E2%80%93a%20visualization%20system%20for%20exploratory%20research%20and%20analysis&author=EF%20Pettersen&author=TD%20Goddard&author=CC%20Huang&author=GS%20Couch&author=DM%20Greenblatt&volume=25&publication_year=2004&pages=1605-1612&pmid=15264254&doi=10.1002/jcc.20084&)\]
64.  Potocký M, Jones MA, Bezvoda R, Smirnoff N, Zárský V. 2007. Reactive oxygen species produced by NADPH oxidase are involved in pollen tube growth. The New Phytologist 174:742–751. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8137.2007.02042.x)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17504458/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=The%20New%20Phytologist&title=Reactive%20oxygen%20species%20produced%20by%20NADPH%20oxidase%20are%20involved%20in%20pollen%20tube%20growth&author=M%20Potock%C3%BD&author=MA%20Jones&author=R%20Bezvoda&author=N%20Smirnoff&author=V%20Z%C3%A1rsk%C3%BD&volume=174&publication_year=2007&pages=742-751&pmid=17504458&doi=10.1111/j.1469-8137.2007.02042.x&)\]
65.  Price MN, Dehal PS, Arkin AP. 2010. FastTree 2-approximately maximum-likelihood trees for large alignments. PLoS One 5:e9490. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0009490)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2835736/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20224823/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20One&title=FastTree%202-approximately%20maximum-likelihood%20trees%20for%20large%20alignments&author=MN%20Price&author=PS%20Dehal&author=AP%20Arkin&volume=5&publication_year=2010&pages=e9490&pmid=20224823&doi=10.1371/journal.pone.0009490&)\]
66.  Robson F, Costa MM, Hepworth SR, Vizir I, Piñeiro M, Reeves PH, Putterill J, Coupland G. 2001. Functional importance of conserved domains in the flowering-time gene CONSTANS demonstrated by analysis of mutant alleles and transgenic plants. The Plant Journal 28:619–631. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-313x.2001.01163.x)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11851908/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=The%20Plant%20Journal&title=Functional%20importance%20of%20conserved%20domains%20in%20the%20flowering-time%20gene%20CONSTANS%20demonstrated%20by%20analysis%20of%20mutant%20alleles%20and%20transgenic%20plants&author=F%20Robson&author=MM%20Costa&author=SR%20Hepworth&author=I%20Vizir&author=M%20Pi%C3%B1eiro&volume=28&publication_year=2001&pages=619-631&pmid=11851908&doi=10.1046/j.1365-313x.2001.01163.x&)\]
67.  Rosenwasser S, Fluhr R, Joshi JR, Leviatan N, Sela N, Hetzroni A, Friedman H. 2013. ROSMETER: a bioinformatic tool for the identification of transcriptomic imprints related to reactive oxygen species type and origin provides new insights into stress responses. Plant Physiology 163:1071–1083. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.113.218206)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3793026/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23922270/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Physiology&title=ROSMETER:%20a%20bioinformatic%20tool%20for%20the%20identification%20of%20transcriptomic%20imprints%20related%20to%20reactive%20oxygen%20species%20type%20and%20origin%20provides%20new%20insights%20into%20stress%20responses&author=S%20Rosenwasser&author=R%20Fluhr&author=JR%20Joshi&author=N%20Leviatan&author=N%20Sela&volume=163&publication_year=2013&pages=1071-1083&pmid=23922270&doi=10.1104/pp.113.218206&)\]
68.  Roshan U, Livesay DR. 2006. Probalign: multiple sequence alignment using partition function posterior probabilities. Bioinformatics 22:2715–2721. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btl472)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16954142/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bioinformatics&title=Probalign:%20multiple%20sequence%20alignment%20using%20partition%20function%20posterior%20probabilities&author=U%20Roshan&author=DR%20Livesay&volume=22&publication_year=2006&pages=2715-2721&pmid=16954142&doi=10.1093/bioinformatics/btl472&)\]
69.  Schüler O, Hemmersbach R, Böhmer M. 2015. A bird’s-eye view of molecular changes in plant gravitropism using omics techniques. Frontiers in Plant Science 6:1176. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2015.01176)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4689802/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26734055/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Frontiers%20in%20Plant%20Science&title=A%20bird%E2%80%99s-eye%20view%20of%20molecular%20changes%20in%20plant%20gravitropism%20using%20omics%20techniques&author=O%20Sch%C3%BCler&author=R%20Hemmersbach&author=M%20B%C3%B6hmer&volume=6&publication_year=2015&pages=1176&pmid=26734055&doi=10.3389/fpls.2015.01176&)\]
70.  Schultz ER, Zupanska AK, Sng NJ, Paul A-L, Ferl RJ. 2017. Skewing in _Arabidopsis_ roots involves disparate environmental signaling pathways. BMC Plant Biology 17:31. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12870-017-0975-9)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5286820/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28143395/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=BMC%20Plant%20Biology&title=Skewing%20in%20Arabidopsis%20roots%20involves%20disparate%20environmental%20signaling%20pathways&author=ER%20Schultz&author=AK%20Zupanska&author=NJ%20Sng&author=A-L%20Paul&author=RJ%20Ferl&volume=17&publication_year=2017&pages=31&pmid=28143395&doi=10.1186/s12870-017-0975-9&)\]
71.  Schwarzländer M, Finkemeier I. 2012. Mitochondrial energy and redox signaling in plants. Antioxidants & Redox Signaling 18:2122–2144. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1089/ars.2012.5104)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3698670/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23234467/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Antioxidants%20&%20Redox%20Signaling&title=Mitochondrial%20energy%20and%20redox%20signaling%20in%20plants&author=M%20Schwarzl%C3%A4nder&author=I%20Finkemeier&volume=18&publication_year=2012&pages=2122-2144&pmid=23234467&doi=10.1089/ars.2012.5104&)\]
72.  Shigeto J, Tsutsumi Y. 2016. Diverse functions and reactions of class III peroxidases. The New Phytologist 209:1395–1402. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.13738)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26542837/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=The%20New%20Phytologist&title=Diverse%20functions%20and%20reactions%20of%20class%20III%20peroxidases&author=J%20Shigeto&author=Y%20Tsutsumi&volume=209&publication_year=2016&pages=1395-1402&pmid=26542837&doi=10.1111/nph.13738&)\]
73.  Shin R, Schachtman DP. 2004. Hydrogen peroxide mediates plant root cell response to nutrient deprivation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 101:8827–8832. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0401707101)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC423280/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15173595/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proceedings%20of%20the%20National%20Academy%20of%20Sciences&title=Hydrogen%20peroxide%20mediates%20plant%20root%20cell%20response%20to%20nutrient%20deprivation&author=R%20Shin&author=DP%20Schachtman&volume=101&publication_year=2004&pages=8827-8832&pmid=15173595&doi=10.1073/pnas.0401707101&)\]
74.  Sievers F, Wilm A, Dineen D, Gibson TJ, Karplus K, Li W, Lopez R, McWilliam H, Remmert M, Soding J, Thompson JD, Higgins DG. 2011. Fast, scalable generation of high-quality protein multiple sequence alignments using Clustal Omega. Molecular Systems Biology 7:539. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/msb.2011.75)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3261699/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21988835/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Molecular%20Systems%20Biology&title=Fast,%20scalable%20generation%20of%20high-quality%20protein%20multiple%20sequence%20alignments%20using%20Clustal%20Omega&author=F%20Sievers&author=A%20Wilm&author=D%20Dineen&author=TJ%20Gibson&author=K%20Karplus&volume=7&publication_year=2011&pages=539&pmid=21988835&doi=10.1038/msb.2011.75&)\]
75.  Sng N, Callaham J, Ferl RJ, Paul A-L. 2014. _Arabidopsis thaliana_ for spaceflight applications – preparing dormant biology for passive stowage and on orbit activation. Gravitational Space Research 2:2 \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Gravitational%20Space%20Research&title=Arabidopsis%20thaliana%20for%20spaceflight%20applications%20%E2%80%93%20preparing%20dormant%20biology%20for%20passive%20stowage%20and%20on%20orbit%20activation&author=N%20Sng&author=J%20Callaham&author=RJ%20Ferl&author=A-L%20Paul&volume=2&publication_year=2014&pages=2&)\]
76.  Soga K, Wakabayashi K, Kamisaka S, Hoson T. 2002. Stimulation of elongation growth and xyloglucan breakdown in _Arabidopsis_ hypocotyls under microgravity conditions in space. Planta 215:1040–1046. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00425-002-0838-x)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12355165/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Planta&title=Stimulation%20of%20elongation%20growth%20and%20xyloglucan%20breakdown%20in%20Arabidopsis%20hypocotyls%20under%20microgravity%20conditions%20in%20space&author=K%20Soga&author=K%20Wakabayashi&author=S%20Kamisaka&author=T%20Hoson&volume=215&publication_year=2002&pages=1040-1046&pmid=12355165&doi=10.1007/s00425-002-0838-x&)\]
77.  Stamatakis A. 2014. RAxML version 8: a tool for phylogenetic analysis and post-analysis of large phylogenies. Bioinformatics 30:1312–1313. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btu033)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3998144/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24451623/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bioinformatics&title=RAxML%20version%208:%20a%20tool%20for%20phylogenetic%20analysis%20and%20post-analysis%20of%20large%20phylogenies&author=A%20Stamatakis&volume=30&publication_year=2014&pages=1312-1313&pmid=24451623&doi=10.1093/bioinformatics/btu033&)\]
78.  Sugimoto M, Oono Y, Gusev O, Matsumoto T, Yazawa T, Levinskikh MA, Sychev VN, Bingham GE, Wheeler R, Hummerick M. 2014. Genome-wide expression analysis of reactive oxygen species gene network in Mizuna plants grown in long-term spaceflight. BMC Plant Biology 14:4. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2229-14-4)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3927260/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24393219/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=BMC%20Plant%20Biology&title=Genome-wide%20expression%20analysis%20of%20reactive%20oxygen%20species%20gene%20network%20in%20Mizuna%20plants%20grown%20in%20long-term%20spaceflight&author=M%20Sugimoto&author=Y%20Oono&author=O%20Gusev&author=T%20Matsumoto&author=T%20Yazawa&volume=14&publication_year=2014&pages=4&pmid=24393219&doi=10.1186/1471-2229-14-4&)\]
79.  Suzuki N, Koussevitzky S, Mittler R, Miller G. 2012. ROS and redox signalling in the response of plants to abiotic stress. Plant, Cell & Environment 35:259–270. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-3040.2011.02336.x)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21486305/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant,%20Cell%20&%20Environment&title=ROS%20and%20redox%20signalling%20in%20the%20response%20of%20plants%20to%20abiotic%20stress&author=N%20Suzuki&author=S%20Koussevitzky&author=R%20Mittler&author=G%20Miller&volume=35&publication_year=2012&pages=259-270&pmid=21486305&doi=10.1111/j.1365-3040.2011.02336.x&)\]
80.  Swanson S, Gilroy S. 2010. ROS in plant development. Physiologia Plantarum 138:384–392. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1399-3054.2009.01313.x)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19947976/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Physiologia%20Plantarum&title=ROS%20in%20plant%20development&author=S%20Swanson&author=S%20Gilroy&volume=138&publication_year=2010&pages=384-392&pmid=19947976&doi=10.1111/j.1399-3054.2009.01313.x&)\]
81.  Talavera G, Castresana J. 2007. Improvement of phylogenies after removing divergent and ambiguously aligned blocks from protein sequence alignments. Systems Biology 56:564–577. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1080/10635150701472164)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17654362/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Systems%20Biology&title=Improvement%20of%20phylogenies%20after%20removing%20divergent%20and%20ambiguously%20aligned%20blocks%20from%20protein%20sequence%20alignments&author=G%20Talavera&author=J%20Castresana&volume=56&publication_year=2007&pages=564-577&pmid=17654362&doi=10.1080/10635150701472164&)\]
82.  Teige M, Scheikl E, Eulgem T, Dóczi R, Ichimura K, Shinozaki K, Dangl JL, Hirt H. 2004. The MKK2 pathway mediates cold and salt stress signaling in _Arabidopsis_. Molecular Cell 15:141–152. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2004.06.023)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15225555/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Molecular%20Cell&title=The%20MKK2%20pathway%20mediates%20cold%20and%20salt%20stress%20signaling%20in%20Arabidopsis&author=M%20Teige&author=E%20Scheikl&author=T%20Eulgem&author=R%20D%C3%B3czi&author=K%20Ichimura&volume=15&publication_year=2004&pages=141-152&pmid=15225555&doi=10.1016/j.molcel.2004.06.023&)\]
83.  Wheeler WC, Gatesy J, DeSalle R. 1995. Elision: a method for accommodating multiple molecular sequence alignments with alignment-ambiguous sites. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 4:1–9. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1006/mpev.1995.1001)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7620631/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Molecular%20Phylogenetics%20and%20Evolution&title=Elision:%20a%20method%20for%20accommodating%20multiple%20molecular%20sequence%20alignments%20with%20alignment-ambiguous%20sites&author=WC%20Wheeler&author=J%20Gatesy&author=R%20DeSalle&volume=4&publication_year=1995&pages=1-9&pmid=7620631&doi=10.1006/mpev.1995.1001&)\]
84.  Winter D, Vinegar B, Nahal H, Ammar R, Wilson GV, Provart NJ. 2007. An “electronic fluorescent pictograph” browser for exploring and analyzing large-scale biological data sets. PLoS One 2:e718. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0000718)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1934936/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17684564/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20One&title=An%20%E2%80%9Celectronic%20fluorescent%20pictograph%E2%80%9D%20browser%20for%20exploring%20and%20analyzing%20large-scale%20biological%20data%20sets&author=D%20Winter&author=B%20Vinegar&author=H%20Nahal&author=R%20Ammar&author=GV%20Wilson&volume=2&publication_year=2007&pages=e718&pmid=17684564&doi=10.1371/journal.pone.0000718&)\]
85.  Yan H, Marquardt K, Indorf M, Jutt D, Kircher S, Neuhaus G, Rodríguez-Franco M. 2011. Nuclear localization and interaction with COP1 are required for STO/BBX24 function during photomorphogenesis. Plant Physiology 156:1772–1782. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.111.180208)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3149933/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21685177/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Physiology&title=Nuclear%20localization%20and%20interaction%20with%20COP1%20are%20required%20for%20STO/BBX24%20function%20during%20photomorphogenesis&author=H%20Yan&author=K%20Marquardt&author=M%20Indorf&author=D%20Jutt&author=S%20Kircher&volume=156&publication_year=2011&pages=1772-1782&pmid=21685177&doi=10.1104/pp.111.180208&)\]
86.  Zander M, Chen S, Imkampe J, Thurow C, Gatz C. 2012. Repression of the _Arabidopsis thaliana_ jasmonic acid/ethylene-induced defense pathway by TGA-interacting glutaredoxins depends on their C-terminal ALWL motif. Molecular Plant 5:831–840. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/mp/ssr113)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22207719/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Molecular%20Plant&title=Repression%20of%20the%20Arabidopsis%20thaliana%20jasmonic%20acid/ethylene-induced%20defense%20pathway%20by%20TGA-interacting%20glutaredoxins%20depends%20on%20their%20C-terminal%20ALWL%20motif&author=M%20Zander&author=S%20Chen&author=J%20Imkampe&author=C%20Thurow&author=C%20Gatz&volume=5&publication_year=2012&pages=831-840&pmid=22207719&doi=10.1093/mp/ssr113&)\]
87.  Zhang Y, Wang L, Xie J, Zheng H. 2014. Differential protein expression profiling of _Arabidopsis thaliana_ callus under microgravity on board the Chinese SZ-8 spacecraft. Planta 241:475–488. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00425-014-2196-x)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25374148/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Planta&title=Differential%20protein%20expression%20profiling%20of%20Arabidopsis%20thaliana%20callus%20under%20microgravity%20on%20board%20the%20Chinese%20SZ-8%20spacecraft&author=Y%20Zhang&author=L%20Wang&author=J%20Xie&author=H%20Zheng&volume=241&publication_year=2014&pages=475-488&pmid=25374148&doi=10.1007/s00425-014-2196-x&)\]
88.  Zupanska AK, Denison FC, Ferl RJ, Paul A-L. 2013. Spaceflight engages heat shock protein and other molecular chaperone genes in tissue culture cells of _Arabidopsis thaliana_. American Journal of Botany 100:235–248. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3732/ajb.1200343)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23258370/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=American%20Journal%20of%20Botany&title=Spaceflight%20engages%20heat%20shock%20protein%20and%20other%20molecular%20chaperone%20genes%20in%20tissue%20culture%20cells%20of%20Arabidopsis%20thaliana&author=AK%20Zupanska&author=FC%20Denison&author=RJ%20Ferl&author=A-L%20Paul&volume=100&publication_year=2013&pages=235-248&pmid=23258370&doi=10.3732/ajb.1200343&)\]

## Associated Data

_This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article._

### Supplementary Materials

Supplementary Material