---
title: "ANN1 and ANN2 Function in Post-Phloem Sugar Transport in Root Tips to Affect Primary Root Growth"
authors: ["Jing Wang", "Jawon Song", "Greg Clark", "Stanley J Roux"]
journal: "Plant Physiology"
date: "2018 Jul 17"
doi: "10.1104/pp.18.00713"
source_url: "https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6130020/"
---

# ANN1 and ANN2 Function in Post-Phloem Sugar Transport in Root Tips to Affect Primary Root Growth

*Plant Physiology*, 2018 Jul 17, [doi:10.1104/pp.18.00713](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.18.00713)

### Jing Wang
### Jawon Song
### Greg Clark
### Stanley J Roux

* * *

ANN1 and ANN2 regulate Arabidopsis primary root growth by facilitating post-phloem transport of sugar in root tips.

## Abstract

Annexins are a multigene family of calcium-dependent membrane-binding proteins that play important roles in plant cell signaling. Annexins are multifunctional proteins, and their function in plants is not comprehensively understood. Arabidopsis (_Arabidopsis thaliana_) annexins ANN1 and ANN2 are 64% identical in their primary structure, and both are highly expressed in seedlings. Here, we showed that _ann-mutant_ seedlings grown in the absence of sugar show decreased primary root growth and altered columella cells in root caps; however, these mutant defects are rescued by Suc, Glc, or Fru. In seedlings grown without sugar, significant up-regulation of photosynthetic gene expression and chlorophyll accumulation was found in _ann-mutant_ cotyledons compared to that in wild type, which indicates potential sugar starvation in the roots of _ann-mutant_ seedlings. Unexpectedly, the overall sugar content of _ann-mutant_ primary roots was significantly higher than that of wild-type roots when grown without sugar. To examine the diffusion of sugar along the entire root to the root tip, we examined the unloading pattern of carboxyfluorescein dye and found that post-phloem sugar transport was impaired in _ann-mutant_ root tips compared to that in wild type. Increased levels of ROS and callose were detected in the root tips of _ann-mutant_ seedlings grown without Suc, the latter of which would restrict plasmodesmal sugar transport to root tips. Our results indicate that ANN1 and ANN2 play an important role in post-phloem sugar transport to the root tip, which in turn indirectly influences photosynthetic rates in cotyledons. This study expands our understanding of the function of annexins in plants.

* * *

Annexins are multifunctional proteins that have been found in all plants and vertebrate species. Their tertiary structure with calcium-binding domains is evolutionarily conserved in all species ([Morgan et al., 2004](#bib48), [2006](#bib49); [Konopka-Postupolska et al., 2011](#bib34); [Clark et al., 2012](#bib13)). In plants, annexins have been localized in many parts of the cell, including the plasma membrane, the Golgi apparatus, secretory vesicles, vacuolar membranes, and the nucleus. Certain annexins are also found in the extracellular matrix as secreted proteins.

On the molecular level, certain plant annexins serve as components of calcium channels or regulate calcium channel activity to help initiate and amplify calcium signals in plants ([Laohavisit et al., 2010](#bib37); [Laohavisit and Davies, 2011](#bib36); [Davies, 2014](#bib15)). On the cellular level, one of the earliest functions discovered for annexins in plant cells was meditation of vesicle trafficking and secretion ([Konopka-Postupolska and Clark, 2017](#bib32)). On the whole-plant level, key discoveries of annexin function have been carried out using mutants of the model plant, Arabidopsis (_Arabidopsis thaliana_), where there are eight different annexins that show differential expression patterns ([Cantero et al., 2006](#bib8)). Several of these mutant studies show that certain Arabidopsis annexins function to provide stress tolerance in response to a variety of stress conditions ([Konopka-Postupolska et al., 2009](#bib33); [Dalal et al., 2014](#bib14); [Richards et al., 2014](#bib52); [Wang et al., 2015](#bib64); [Liao et al., 2017](#bib41)). For example, overexpression of ANN1 in Arabidopsis results in increased antioxidant activity and confers drought tolerance ([Konopka-Postupolska et al., 2009](#bib33)).

Plant annexins are expressed in all stages of plant growth and development. Recently, [Thieme et al. (2015)](#bib61) found that some Arabidopsis annexin transcripts can be transported across the whole plant by phloem sap. Annexin proteins have also been identified in the phloem sap of several different plant species ([Kehr, 2006](#bib26)), and in Arabidopsis, ANN1 was found in phloem exudate of rosette leaves ([Guelette et al., 2012](#bib24)). Immunolocalization of a pea annexin protein in young developing sieve elements led to the suggestion that annexins may play a role in phloem cell development ([Clark et al., 1992](#bib11)). In situ transcript localization studies found that _ANN1_ is expressed in phloem and phloem parenchyma in Arabidopsis seedlings ([Clark et al., 2001](#bib12)). However, the physiological importance of annexins in phloem remains undefined.

Phloem transport links sources to sinks and is a key passageway for communication between leaves and roots. Sugars generated from photosynthetic leaves (source organs) and transported through the phloem to roots (sink organs) serve both as metabolic substrates to fuel plant growth and development and as signals that integrate plant responses to environmental stimuli, hormones, and changes in nutrition status ([Martin et al., 2002](#bib45); [Moore et al., 2003](#bib47); [Smeekens et al., 2010](#bib57); [Lastdrager et al., 2014](#bib38); [Ljung et al., 2015](#bib43); [Dobrenel et al., 2016](#bib18); [Dodds and Lagudah, 2016](#bib19); [Kühn, 2016](#bib35); [Li and Sheen, 2016](#bib40); [Baena-González and Hanson, 2017](#bib2)). Plants have developed complex sugar-sensing systems to monitor and respond to continuous fluctuations in sugar status caused by the circadian clock and frequent environmental changes ([Stitt and Zeeman, 2012](#bib59)).

Multiple recent studies have revealed significant roles of sugar in plant growth ([Lastdrager et al., 2014](#bib38)) and development ([Wingler, 2018](#bib65)). For example, sugar availability to axillary buds is a key determinant for shoot branching. Removal of pea shoot tips induces a sufficient flow of sugar into axillary buds to repress the expression of the branching inhibitor gene _Branched1_, which highlights the importance of sugars in mediating apical dominance ([Mason et al., 2014](#bib46)). Sugars in photosynthetic leaves function as mobile signals to repress the expression of microRNA156 and thus promote the maturation of juvenile plants ([Yu et al., 2013](#bib66)).

Important sugar responses are also found in roots, whose growth depends on Suc transported from photosynthetic leaves. This dependence underscores the importance of understanding the effects of sugars on root growth and development. Although sugar controls primary and lateral root growth in a dose-dependent manner ([Freixes et al., 2002](#bib22)), sugar demand in roots continuously changes due to environmental signals ([Lemoine et al., 2013](#bib39)) and developmental stages. Having a sugar-sensing system in roots that can efficiently monitor sugar levels would be important for root and whole-plant growth. However, studies of sugar signaling in roots are generally scant.

Root growth is closely associated with sugar concentrations ([Thompson et al., 2017](#bib62)). Greater soluble sugar content has been found in fast-growing roots of pruned barley plants, whereas slow-growing barley roots contain less soluble sugar ([Farrar and Jones, 1986](#bib21)). Suc generated by photosynthesis in cotyledons is required to regulate primary root growth ([Kircher and Schopfer, 2012](#bib27)). Suc promotes primary root elongation in a dose-dependent manner. The higher the exogenous Suc concentration, the faster primary roots elongate ([Freixes et al., 2002](#bib22)). Furthermore, the finding that neighboring secondary roots in the same root system have different growth rates in their elongation zone as a function of local sugar concentration also favors the conclusion that sugar is a major determinant of root growth ([Freixes et al., 2002](#bib22)).

Because local sugar concentrations play critical roles in regulating root growth, it is important to learn more about the mechanisms that control sugar transport into the growing zones of the root. Sugars generated by photosynthesis in leaves are loaded into sieve elements of the phloem and then delivered by phloem into roots ([De Schepper et al., 2013](#bib16)). According to pressure flow theory, it is the osmotic differential in phloem sieve elements that drives the bulk flow from source photosynthetic organs to sink organs such as roots. After sugar reaches its destination, it must be unloaded from phloem sieve elements into surrounding cells. [Ross-Elliott et al. (2017)](#bib53) have proposed that after sugar reaches the connecting tissue between conducting phloem and sink tissues, called protophloem, it is unloaded into surrounding cells through funnel plasmodesmata and then diffuses freely along a concentration gradient into cells of the root tip in a symplastic way. The unloading of sugar into the elongation zone, mitotic zone, and root cap accommodates the high-energy demands of fast-growing regions in roots. Here, we describe the effect of knocking out two of the eight members of the annexin gene family in Arabidopsis, namely _ANN1_ and _ANN2_, on the diffusion of sugars from the unloading zone to root tips, and we discuss how these two annexins play an important mechanistic role in post-phloem transport of sugars into root tips.

## RESULTS

### Inhibition of Primary Root Growth in _ANN1_ and _ANN2_ Knockout Mutants Is Rescued by Exogenous Suc Independent of Its Osmotic Effects

In 3-d-old seedlings, all _ANN1_ and _ANN2_ knockout mutants (_ann1-2_, _ann1-3_, _ann2-1_, and _ann1-2/ann2-1_) had primary root lengths that were significantly shorter compared to wild type when grown on agar plates containing no Suc ([Fig. 1, A and B](#fig1)). However, these knockout mutants had the same hypocotyl lengths compared to that in wild type ([Supplemental Fig. S1](http://www.plantphysiol.org/cgi/content/full/pp.18.00713/DC1)). To rule out that the differences in primary root lengths were due to differences in germination, we also measured growth rates in both mutants and wild type under the same condition ([Fig. 1B](#fig1)). Consistent with the root length data, the primary roots of _ann1-2_, _ann1-3_, _ann2-1_, and _ann1-2/ann2-1_ grew significantly slower compared to that in wild type.

This inhibition of primary root growth observed in _ANN1_ and _ANN2_ knockout mutants was rescued by 2% Suc ([Fig. 1, A and C](#fig1)). This rescue was not due to the osmotic effect of Suc in agar plates, since equimolar concentrations of mannitol did not rescue the primary root growth inhibition in _ANN1_ and _ANN2_ mutants ([Fig. 1, A and D](#fig1)). Similar results were also found in 1% sorbitol and 1% _o_\-methyl-Glc treatments ([Supplemental Fig. S2, C and D](http://www.plantphysiol.org/cgi/content/full/pp.18.00713/DC1)), indicating that Suc functioned either as a carbon source or a signal to rescue the primary root growth inhibition in _ANN1_ and _ANN2_ knockout mutants. Since Suc can be catalyzed by invertase into Fru and Glc, we also tested 1% Glc and 1% Fru treatments ([Supplemental Fig. S2, A and B](http://www.plantphysiol.org/cgi/content/full/pp.18.00713/DC1)). Both Glc and Fru also rescued primary root growth inhibition in _ANN1_ and _ANN2_ knockout mutants.

### Inhibition of Root Cap Development in _ANN1_ and _ANN2_ Knockout Mutants Is Rescued by Exogenous Suc

As observed by light microscopy, knocking out _ANN1_ or _ANN2_ affected primary root structures of 4-d-old _ann1-2_, _ann1-3_, _ann2-1_, and _ann1-2/ann2-1_ seedlings when grown without Suc. Starch detection by Lugol staining revealed reduced layers of starch-containing columella cells in _ann1-2_, _ann1-3_, _ann2-1_, and _ann1-2/ann2-1_ compared to that in the wild type ([Fig. 2A](#fig2)). In wild type root caps, there are four layers of columella cells with Lugol-stained starch granules in them, whereas only three layers of columella cells were detected in _ANN1_ and _ANN2_ knockout mutants. Also, unlike wild-type roots, the roots of _ANN1_ and _ANN2_ mutants had no border-like cells around their root caps. These root cap defects in _ann1-2_, _ann1-3_, _ann2-1_, and _ann1-2/ann2-1_ were rescued by 1% Suc ([Fig. 2B](#fig2)). When grown with 1% Suc for 4 d, _ann1-2_, _ann1-3_, _ann2-1_, and _ann1-2/ann2-1_ roots showed four layers of starch-containing columella cells like those in wild type with border-like cells attached to the root caps.

Because Lugol staining ([Fig. 2A](#fig2)) revealed similar levels of starch granules in _ann1-2_, _ann2-1_, and _ann1-2/ann2-1_ when seedlings were grown without Suc, _ann1-2_ was used as a representative line for all _ann-_mutants in subsequent quantification of root-tip starch levels ([Fig. 3](#fig3)). Consistent with Lugol staining, _ann1-2_ displayed significantly lower levels of starch in root tips compared to that in wild type when grown without Suc ([Fig. 3](#fig3)).

### Expression of Photosynthesis-Related Genes and Chlorophyll Accumulation Is Enhanced in _ANN1_ Knockout Mutants, Dependent on the Absence of Exogenous Suc

An RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis comparing the transcript abundance in total mRNA extracted from primary roots of 2-week-old wild type, _ann1-2_, and _ann2-1_ grown without Suc in light revealed many differentially expressed genes (DEG) in the primary roots of the mutants. After the DEGs were assigned to gene ontology (GO) terms, the GO analysis in _ann1-2_ revealed functional enrichment in photosynthesis with seven out of a total of 13 up-regulated GO categories related to photosynthesis ([Supplemental Table S1](http://www.plantphysiol.org/cgi/content/full/pp.18.00713/DC1)). This indicated significant enhancement in the expression levels of photosynthetic genes in _ann1-2_ in the absence of exogenous Suc.

Although Arabidopsis roots partially turn green when exposed to light, the main energy source that facilitates root growth originates in the leaves ([Kobayashi et al., 2012](#bib30)). Thus, we decided to assay transcript levels of photosynthetic genes in the cotyledons of 4-d-old _ann1-2_, and wild-type seedlings grown without Suc. We assayed 4-d-old seedlings because evidence shows that the dominant roles of sugar to regulate root growth are probably restricted to the first 5 to 6 d before leaf development ([Kircher and Schopfer, 2012](#bib27)). Among all the genes in photosynthesis-related GO categories, the top five most up-regulated ones were selected to be analyzed by reverse transcription quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR). Results showed that four out of five photosynthetic genes were significantly up-regulated in cotyledons of _ann1-2_ seedlings grown without Suc ([Fig. 4A](#fig4)). These four genes encode chlorophyll-binding protein 2 (CAB2, LHCB1.1), chlorophyll-binding protein 3 (CAB3, LHCB1.2_)_, and two subunits of PSII light-harvesting complex (PSII, LHB1B1, and LHB1B2).

We also quantified the accumulation of chlorophyll in cotyledons of 4-d-old _ann1-2_ and wild-type seedlings grown without Suc. Consistent with the up-regulation of photosynthetic gene expression, cotyledons of _ann1-2_ seedlings showed significantly higher intensity of chlorophyll autofluorescence signal than that in wild-type cotyledons, indicating a higher chlorophyll content in cotyledons of _ann1-2_ seedlings compared to that in the wild type ([Fig. 4, B and C](#fig4)).

Exogenous Suc reversed the enhanced expression of photosynthetic genes and chlorophyll accumulation in cotyledons of _ann1-2_ seedlings. When grown with 1% Suc, _ann1-2_ cotyledons showed similar photosynthetic gene expression levels as that in the wild type ([Fig. 4D](#fig4)), and accumulation of chlorophyll in these tissues was also comparable ([Fig. 4, E and F](#fig4)).

### Knocking Out _ANN1_ and _ANN2_ Induces Accumulation of Soluble Sugars in Primary Roots

We quantified neutral soluble sugars in primary roots of _ann1-2_, _ann2-1_ and wild type by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) using primary roots collected from 1-week-old seedlings grown on agar plates containing no sugars ([Supplemental Table S3](http://www.plantphysiol.org/cgi/content/full/pp.18.00713/DC1)). Unexpectedly, significantly higher amounts of sugars were detected in both _ann1-2_ and _ann2-1_ root tissue relative to that in wild type ([Fig. 5A](#fig5)), including significantly higher contents of soluble Glc ([Fig. 5B](#fig5)) and Fru ([Fig. 5C](#fig5)). Most of the sugar detected was probably in the phloem.

### Knocking Out _ANN1_ and _ANN2_ Impairs Post-Phloem Transport in Root Tips

Because 5(6)-carboxyfluorescein diacetate (CFDA) has been widely used as a phloem-mobile probe ([Oparka et al., 1994](#bib50); [Knoblauch et al., 2015](#bib28)), we used CFDA to detect post-phloem transport in wild-type, _ann1-2_, _ann2-1_, and the _ANN1_\-overexpressing line _35S:ANN1_. _35S:ANN1_ seedlings showed significantly longer roots compared to that in the wild type when grown without Suc ([Supplemental Fig. S3](http://www.plantphysiol.org/cgi/content/full/pp.18.00713/DC1)). All seedlings were grown without Suc for 4 d. After applying CFDA on cotyledons for 30 min, the dye was apparent in the two phloem files in primary roots of _ann1-2_, _ann2-1_, _35S:ANN1_, and the wild type ([Fig. 6A](#fig6)), indicating successful loading of carboxyfluorescein (CF). The wild type showed a characteristic transport pattern of CF along the root cortex ([Fig. 6B](#fig6)). However, in _ann1-2_ and _ann2-1_, the diffusion of CF in root tips was restricted ([Fig. 6B](#fig6)).

The post-phloem region has been defined as the region 250 μm behind the root tip ([Stadler et al., 2005](#bib58); [Ross-Elliott et al., 2017](#bib53)), so we quantified CF fluorescence in three different areas (transition zone, meristem zone, and root cap) of this post-phloem region in _ann1-2_, _ann2-1_, _35S:ANN1_, and wild-type roots ([Fig. 6C](#fig6)). Significantly lower levels of CF fluorescence were detected in both _ann1-2_ and _ann2-1_ roots compared to that in wild type when seedlings were grown without Suc. This significant decrease of CF diffusion was more obvious in root caps, reaching a level more than 50% less compared to that of wild type. In contrast to that in _ann1-2_ and _ann2-1_, _35S:ANN1_ showed significantly higher levels of CF diffusion in root tips compared to that in wild type by more than 50% in root caps. Taken together, these results indicate that _ann1-2_ and _ann2-1_ roots had impaired post-phloem transport; i.e. knocking out _ANN1_ and _ANN2_ restricted the diffusion of sugars from the phloem to the root tip.

### Knocking Out _ANN1_ and _ANN2_ Increased ROS Levels and Callose Accumulation in Root Tips

Intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) regulate plasmodesmata permeability through callose deposition ([Benitez-Alfonso et al., 2009](#bib4), [2011](#bib5); [Stonebloom et al., 2012](#bib60)). To test whether knocking out _ANN1_ and _ANN2_ leads to ROS accumulation in root tips, 2,7-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate (H2DCFDA), a dye that stains hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), was applied to 3-d-old seedlings grown without Suc. Significantly higher levels of stain were detected in root tips of _ann1-2_ and _ann2-1_ compared to that in wild type when grown without Suc ([Fig. 7, A and B](#fig7)). Aniline blue was used to detect callose accumulation in root tips of 3-d-old wild-type, _ann1-2_, and _ann2-1_ seedlings grown without Suc, which revealed significantly higher levels of callose deposition in _ann1-2_ and _ann2-1_ compared to that in wild type ([Fig. 7, C and D](#fig7)).

## DISCUSSION

### _ANN1_ and _ANN2_ Knockout Seedlings Show Suc-Dependent Phenotypes

The observation that significantly higher contents of soluble sugar were detected by GC/MS analysis in primary roots of _ann1-2_ and _ann2-1_ compared to those of wild type when grown together without Suc indicated there was successful phloem transport of sugar from shoots to roots in the knockout mutants, yet the mutants had obvious growth and columella cell defects. The fact that these defects were rescued by exogenous Suc independent of its osmotic effects suggested the possibility that _ANN1_ and _ANN2_ helped to regulate the post-phloem transport of Suc into root tips. Although successful unloading was detected in both the _ANN1_ knockout mutant _ann1-2_ and the _ANN2_ knockout mutant _ann2-1_, the diffusion of CFDA into root tips was impaired in both _ann1-2_ and _ann2-1_, indicating these mutants had restricted sugar diffusion in fast-growing regions from the unloading zone to root tips. These results are consistent with the conclusion that compromised expression of _ANN1_ and _ANN2_ leads to impaired diffusion of sugars in the fast-growing root apex, and this, in turn, inhibits primary root growth. However, further studies quantifying carbohydrate content only in the cap region after laser microdissection are required to confirm this conclusion.

### Sugar in Regulation of Photosynthesis

The regulatory roles of sugar in photosynthetic gene transcripts and photosynthesis capacity have been widely documented ([Koch, 1996](#bib31); [Pego et al., 2000](#bib51)). Sugar starvation in plants activates photosynthesis, whereas high sugar levels inhibit photosynthesis ([Yu et al., 2015](#bib67); [Sami et al., 2016](#bib55)). Sugar represses the transcriptional activity of photosynthetic gene promoters transiently expressed in maize mesophyll protoplasts ([Sheen, 1990](#bib56)). Sugar accumulation in leaves represses photosynthetic gene expression and photosynthesis ([Pego et al., 2000](#bib51)). Roots are typical sink organs. Sugar demands in young roots promote photosynthesis in leaves. For example, overexpression of the _HIGHER YIELD RICE_ gene encoding an APETALA2/ETHYLENE RESPONSIVE FACTOR transcription factor leads to increased root length, branching, and strength, which in turn promotes photosynthesis in leaves ([Ambavaram et al., 2014](#bib1)). However, the mechanism of how plants monitor sugar levels in roots remains an active area of investigation. Here, we hypothesize that root tips are sugar-sensing tissues, and their sugar status can affect photosynthesis capacity in leaves.

As noted above, our results revealed sugar starvation in the actively growing root apex of the _ann1-2_ and _ann2-1_ knockout mutants by using CF as a phloem mobile probe. Evidence that this apical sugar starvation led to an up-regulation of photosynthesis was indicated by the up-regulated expression of genes encoding CAB2 (LHCB1.1), CAB3 (LHCB 1.2), and PSII subunits (LHB1B1 and LHB1B2), along with increased chlorophyll contents in _ann1-2_. The enhancement of photosynthesis in _ann1-2_ was most likely the change that resulted in the elevated sugar contents observed in primary roots of _ann1-2_. However, because these accumulated sugars could not reach the root apex due to the defective post-phloem transport of sugars in _ann1-2_, they failed to rescue primary root growth defects and to reverse the enhancement of photosynthesis. Assuming that sugars accumulate in the phloem and unloading zone without sufficient diffusion into the post-phloem region, this transport defect would lead to sugar starvation in root tips. Because roots can communicate their nutrient status to shoots and induce responses in them ([Ko and Helariutta, 2017](#bib29)), the stress of sugar starvation in root tips could initiate a root-to-shoot signal, just as salt stress in roots promote the propagation of Ca2+ waves from roots to shoots ([Choi et al., 2014](#bib10); [Evans et al., 2016](#bib20)). Plausibly, such a signal could help explain how sugar-deprived root tips could induce the up-regulation of photosynthetic genes in leaves.

Roots efficiently take up Suc and Glc from the media ([Chaudhuri et al., 2008](#bib9)), and consistently, exogenously supplied sugars in the medium successfully rescued primary root growth defects and reversed photosynthesis enhancement in _ann1-2_. These results favor the conclusion that ANN1 helps control root sugar status, which would result in feedback regulation of photosynthesis. Knocking out _ANN1_ may result in sugar starvation in roots, which could serve as a signal for plants to up-regulate photosynthesis.

### Post-Phloem Transport of Sugar to Root Tips

Apical sugar concentration in root tips has been considered to play the determinant role in regulating root growth and development ([Freixes et al., 2002](#bib22)). The diffusion of CF in root tips of _ann1-2_ and _ann2-1_ was restricted, whereas the _ANN1_\-ovexpressing line _35S:ANN1_ showed promoted diffusion of CF. We interpreted these results to indicate that knocking out _ANN1_ and _ANN2_ restricted symplastic diffusion in post-phloem transport from the unloading zone to root tips and that this restriction impaired primary root growth along with root cap development.

Sugar diffuses freely along the concentration gradient through plasmodesmata in the root apex. It is now widely accepted that plasmodesmata are dynamic channels whose permeability is highly regulated during plant growth and development ([Sager and Lee, 2014](#bib54)). Callose has been found deposited in the neck region of plasmodesmata and can restrict the size exclusion limit of plasmodesmata ([Luna et al., 2011](#bib44); [Zavaliev et al., 2011](#bib68)). ROS accumulation can increase callose accumulation, which may result in reduced plasmodesmatal transport ([Benitez-Alfonso et al., 2009](#bib4), [2011](#bib5); [Stonebloom et al., 2012](#bib60)).

ANNt1 has antioxidant activity ([Gidrol et al., 1996](#bib23)), and this activity may help explain the results of prior studies that documented a link between _ANN1_ suppression and an increase in ROS levels. For example, the knockout of _ANN1_ results in the accumulation of higher levels of ROS in leaves compared to that in wild type ([Konopka-Postupolska et al., 2009](#bib33)). Similarly, our results show that knocking out _ANN1_ and _ANN2_ leads to hyperaccumulation of ROS in root tips, and, like earlier studies, associates this change with an elevated accumulation of callose. Assuming that some of this accumulated callose is deposited in plasmodesmata, it would restrict plasmodesmatal sugar transport and thus help explain why post-phloem transport of sugar to root tips is inhibited in mutants.

In conclusion, our results provide data linking ANN1 and ANN2 to the regulation of primary root growth and development. This study expands our understanding of the function of annexins in plants to include an important role in the post-phloem transport of sugars to the root tip, which, in turn, indirectly impacts photosynthetic rates in cotyledons.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

### Plant Materials and Growth Conditions

Arabidopsis (_Arabidopsis thaliana_) Colombia (Col-0) ecotype was used as the wild type in all experiments. _ANN1_ (At1g35720) and _ANN2_ (At5g65020) are studied. Annexin T-DNA insertion mutants including _ann1-2_, _ann1-3_, _ann2-1_, _ann1-2/ann2-1_, and _35S:ANN1_ used in this study were all obtained from [Wang et al. (2015)](#bib64). All seeds were surface sterilized by 75% (v/v) ethanol for 1 min and 20% bleach (v/v) for 10 min. After washing five times with sterile, deionized water, seeds were sowed on agar plates containing either no Suc, 2% (w/v) Suc, or 1% (w/v) mannitol. Seeds on agar plates were stratified in darkness at 4°C for 3 d. Stratified plates were placed vertically in a growth chamber (Percival AR-66 L; light intensity of 275/µmol m−2 s−1, humidity of approximately 80%, 20°C) in continuous light or in darkness. Unless otherwise noted, chemicals were reagent grade from Sigma-Aldrich.

### Lugol Staining of Columella Cells

Seedlings grown with 1% Suc or without Suc were submerged in a root cap fixative solution (5% \[w/v\] formaldehyde, 5% \[v/v\] acetic acid, and 25% \[v/v\] ethanol) for 24 h. Lugol staining of root caps was done as described by [Hong et al. (2015)](#bib25). Ten to thirteen seedlings were imaged for each genotype with a DIC optics on a Nikon 90i Stereology microscope, using a 60× objective.

### Starch Quantification

Starch levels in 2 mm root tips of 10-d-old wild-type and _ann1-2_ seedlings grown without Suc were assayed in ethanol extracts using methods described by [Bergmeyer (1984)](#bib7), [Barratt et al. (2009)](#bib3), and [Divya et al. (2010)](#bib17).

### RNA Extraction

Trizol reagent was used in all RNA extraction experiments following the manufacturer’s protocol.

### RNA-Seq Analysis

To elucidate the mechanisms of ANN1 and ANN2 in regulation of primary root growth, we performed a comparative RNA-seq using total RNA from primary roots excised from 2-week-old wild-type, _ann1-2_, and _ann2-1_ seedlings grown without Suc in light. Total RNA extracted from primary roots of 2-week-old wild-type, _ann1-2_, and _ann2-1_ seedlings grown without Suc was submitted to the Genome Sequencing and Analysis Facility (GSAF) at the University of Texas at Austin. Both library construction and sequencing were performed by GSAF. After filtering low-quality reads and removing adaptor contamination from the raw data of Illumina reads, the following steps were as described by [Van Verk et al. (2013)](#bib63) to detect differential expression in _ann1-2_ and _ann2-1_ compared to Col-0. A cutoff value of a greater than 2-fold change in expression was used to select differentially expressed genes in _ann1-2_ and _ann2-1_.

To further investigate the biological functions of the DEG in both _ann1-2_ and _ann2-1_, we subsequently assigned the DEGs to GO terms. TAIR10 was downloaded for gene function descriptions and GO annotations. Ture-path rule was applied in functional enrichment analysis. A gene annotated with a particular GO term was also annotated with all its parents. To avoid very generic, noninformative terms for analysis, only terms annotating 500 or fewer genes were retained. Genes annotated with a given specific GO term were considered as a gene set. All the gene sets were tested for the statistical significance of enrichment among themselves using the cumulative hypergeometric test. Then a Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate ([Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995](#bib6)) was also calculated. A false discovery rate threshold of 0.05 was used for significance.

### RT-qPCR Analysis

cDNA was transcribed from RNA by the High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Thermo Fisher) after DNase I digestion. Ten micrograms cDNA was used for each sample. RT-qPCR was performed on QuantStudio platform (Applied Biosystems) with PowerUp Sybr Green Master Mix (Thermo Fisher). Transcripts of _cab2_ (AT1G29920), _cab3_ (AT1G29910), _LHB1B1_ (AT2G34430), _LHB1B2_ (AT2G34420), _ANN1_ (AT1G35720), and _ANN2_ (AT5G65020) under different conditions were studied. Primer sequences used in all RT-qPCR experiments to detect gene expression are listed in [Supplemental Table S2](http://www.plantphysiol.org/cgi/content/full/pp.18.00713/DC1). Specificity of gene amplifications were confirmed by melting curves. For each condition tested, three biological replicates for both wild type and _ann1-2_ with three technical replicates for each biological replicate were used. 2−ΔΔCT method ([Livak and Schmittgen, 2001](#bib42)) was used to calculate fold changes. For significant difference between each condition, either one-way ANOVA for three conditions or Student’s _t_ test for two conditions was used.

### Detection of Chlorophyll Autofluorescence

Cotyledons of 4-d-old intact _ann1-2_ and wild-type seedlings grown either with 1% Suc or without Suc were examined. Chlorophyll autofluorescence 660 to 701 nm was detected with an excitation wavelength of 488 nm. Fifteen seedlings were examined for _ann1-2_ and the wild type.

### GC/MS Analysis

Wild-type, _ann1-2_, and _ann2-1_ seedlings were grown in continuous light on agar plates containing no Suc for a week. Primary roots were collected and washed in sterile water twice. After freeze drying for 2 d, samples were submitted to complex carbohydrate research center at the University of Georgia for GC/MS analysis. Triplicate experiments were carried out.

### CFDA Application

CFDA stock was prepared as 6 mg/mL in acetone and kept at −80°C. A dilution of 1:20 in sterile water was used for application. Wild-type, _ann1-2_, and _ann2-1_ seedlings were grown on agar plates containing no Suc for 4 d. A cotyledon was grazed by fine tweezers to allow 1 µL CFDA to penetrate. All samples were excited by 488-nm laser. Fluorescence 500 to 566 nm was monitored.

### ROS Detection

Three-day-old wild-type, _ann1-2_, and _ann2-1_ seedlings grown without Suc were used. Whole seedlings were incubated in the buffer (30 mm KCl and 10 mm MES-KOH, pH 6.15) with 50 µm H2DCFDA for 1 h in darkness at room temperature. Extra dye was washed three times by the buffer before confocal microscopy. All samples were excited by 488-nm laser. Fluorescence between 517 and 527 nm was collected.

### Aniline Blue Staining

Three-day-old wild-type, _ann1-2_, and _ann2-1_ seedlings grown without Suc were stained by aniline blue (Biosupplies) as described by [Ross-Elliott et al. (2017)](#bib53).

### Confocal Microscopy

Confocal imaging was done by a confocal laser scanning microscope (Zesis LSM 710) in a set manner, starting with the same image acquisition settings and data processing for all experiments. Fluorescent signals in all samples were recorded in Z stacks. Z-project in Fiji was used to flatten Z stacks either with average intensity for better quantification accuracy or with maximum intensity for better focus in representative images. Relative fold change of fluorescent intensity was calculated by division of the mean fluorescent intensity in wild type. Student’s _t_ test was used to calculate significant difference between samples. Fluorescence was quantified in a way to avoid size difference.

### Accession Numbers

Sequence data from this article can be found in the GenBank data library under accession numbers At1g35720 (_ANN1_), At5g6502_0_ (_ANN2_), At1g29920 (_cab2_), At1g29910 (_cab3_), At2g34430 (_LHB1B1_), and At2g34420 (_LHB2B2_).

### Supplemental Data

The following supplemental materials are available.

*   [**Supplemental Figure S1.**](http://www.plantphysiol.org/cgi/content/full/pp.18.00713/DC1) Hypocotyl growth of 3-d-old wild type (Col-0) and _ann1_ and _ann2_ knockout seedlings (_ann1-2_, _ann1-3_, _ann2-1_, and _ann1-2/ann2-1_ double mutant) grown in the absence of Suc.

*   [**Supplemental Figure S2.**](http://www.plantphysiol.org/cgi/content/full/pp.18.00713/DC1) Inhibition of primary root growth in _ann1_ and _ann2_ knockout seedlings is rescued by exogenous Glc and Fru independent of their osmotic effects.

*   [**Supplemental Figure S3.**](http://www.plantphysiol.org/cgi/content/full/pp.18.00713/DC1) _35S:ANN1_ shows promotion of primary root growth compared to that in wild type (Col-0).

*   [**Supplemental Table S1.**](http://www.plantphysiol.org/cgi/content/full/pp.18.00713/DC1) GO analysis of _ann1-2_ up-regulated genes.

*   [**Supplemental Table S2.**](http://www.plantphysiol.org/cgi/content/full/pp.18.00713/DC1) Primer sequences of genes assayed by qRT-qPCR.

*   [**Supplemental Table S3.**](http://www.plantphysiol.org/cgi/content/full/pp.18.00713/DC1) Quantitative analysis of soluble carbohydrates in primary roots of wild type (Col-0), _ann1-2_, and _ann2-1_ when grown without Suc.


## Dive Curated Terms

The following phenotypic, genotypic, and functional terms are of significance to the work described in this paper:

*   [AnnAt1 Gramene: AT1G35720](http://tools.gramene.org/search?query=AT1G35720)

*   [AnnAt1 Araport: AT1G35720](https://www.araport.org/search/thalemine/AT1G35720)


*   [AnnAt2 Gramene: AT5G65020](http://tools.gramene.org/search?query=AT5G65020)

*   [AnnAt2 Araport: AT5G65020](https://www.araport.org/search/thalemine/AT5G65020)


*   [CAB3 Gramene: AT1G29910](http://tools.gramene.org/search?query=AT1G29910)

*   [CAB3 Araport: AT1G29910](https://www.araport.org/search/thalemine/AT1G29910)


*   [LHB1B1 Gramene: AT2G34430](http://tools.gramene.org/search?query=AT2G34430)

*   [LHB1B1 Araport: AT2G34430](https://www.araport.org/search/thalemine/AT2G34430)


*   [LHB1B2 Gramene: AT2G34420](http://tools.gramene.org/search?query=AT2G34420)

*   [LHB1B2 Araport: AT2G34420](https://www.araport.org/search/thalemine/AT2G34420)


*   [CAB2 Gramene: AT1G29920](http://tools.gramene.org/search?query=AT1G29920)

*   [CAB2 Araport: AT1G29920](https://www.araport.org/search/thalemine/AT1G29920)


*   [chlorophyll a CHEBI: CHEBI:18230](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/chebi/searchId.do;?chebiId=CHEBI:18230)


*   [HYPOCOTYL AmiGo: PO:0020100](http://amigo2a.stanford.edu/amigo/term/PO:0020100)


*   [phloem AmiGo: PO:0005417](http://amigo2a.stanford.edu/amigo/term/PO:0005417)


*   [primary root AmiGo: PO:0020127](http://amigo2a.stanford.edu/amigo/term/PO:0020127)


*   [root AmiGo: PO:0009005](http://amigo2a.stanford.edu/amigo/term/PO:0009005)


*   [root tip AmiGo: PO:0000025](http://amigo2a.stanford.edu/amigo/term/PO:0000025)


*   [starch CHEBI: CHEBI:28017](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/chebi/searchId.do;?chebiId=CHEBI:28017)


## Acknowledgments

We thank Dr. Parastoo Azadi of the Complex Carbohydrate Research Center at University of Georgia for GC/MS analysis and Dr. Michael Knoblauch for technical assistance in callose accumulation detection. We also thank Dr. Wenqiang Tang for providing Arabidopsis annexin mutants. We are grateful to Dr. Anna Webb’s help in our confocal experiments.

## Footnotes

\[OPEN\]

Articles can be viewed without a subscription.

## References

1.  Ambavaram MM, Basu S, Krishnan A, Ramegowda V, Batlang U, Rahman L, Baisakh N, Pereira A (2014) Coordinated regulation of photosynthesis in rice increases yield and tolerance to environmental stress. Nat Commun 5: 5302. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms6302)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4220491/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25358745/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Commun&title=Coordinated%20regulation%20of%20photosynthesis%20in%20rice%20increases%20yield%20and%20tolerance%20to%20environmental%20stress&author=MM%20Ambavaram&author=S%20Basu&author=A%20Krishnan&author=V%20Ramegowda&author=U%20Batlang&volume=5&publication_year=2014&pages=5302&pmid=25358745&doi=10.1038/ncomms6302&)\]
2.  Baena-González E, Hanson J (2017) Shaping plant development through the SnRK1-TOR metabolic regulators. Curr Opin Plant Biol 35: 152–157 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbi.2016.12.004)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28027512/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr%20Opin%20Plant%20Biol&title=Shaping%20plant%20development%20through%20the%20SnRK1-TOR%20metabolic%20regulators&author=E%20Baena-Gonz%C3%A1lez&author=J%20Hanson&volume=35&publication_year=2017&pages=152-157&pmid=28027512&doi=10.1016/j.pbi.2016.12.004&)\]
3.  Barratt DHP, Derbyshire P, Findlay K, Pike M, Wellner N, Lunn J, Feil R, Simpson C, Maule AJ, Smith AM (2009) Normal growth of Arabidopsis requires cytosolic invertase but not sucrose synthase. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106: 13124–13129 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0900689106)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2722301/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19470642/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc%20Natl%20Acad%20Sci%20USA&title=Normal%20growth%20of%20Arabidopsis%20requires%20cytosolic%20invertase%20but%20not%20sucrose%20synthase&author=DHP%20Barratt&author=P%20Derbyshire&author=K%20Findlay&author=M%20Pike&author=N%20Wellner&volume=106&publication_year=2009&pages=13124-13129&pmid=19470642&doi=10.1073/pnas.0900689106&)\]
4.  Benitez-Alfonso Y, Cilia M, San Roman A, Thomas C, Maule A, Hearn S, Jackson D (2009) Control of Arabidopsis meristem development by thioredoxin-dependent regulation of intercellular transport. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106: 3615–3620 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0808717106)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2651306/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19218459/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc%20Natl%20Acad%20Sci%20USA&title=Control%20of%20Arabidopsis%20meristem%20development%20by%20thioredoxin-dependent%20regulation%20of%20intercellular%20transport&author=Y%20Benitez-Alfonso&author=M%20Cilia&author=A%20San%20Roman&author=C%20Thomas&author=A%20Maule&volume=106&publication_year=2009&pages=3615-3620&pmid=19218459&doi=10.1073/pnas.0808717106&)\]
5.  Benitez-Alfonso Y, Jackson D, Maule A (2011) Redox regulation of intercellular transport. Protoplasma 248: 131–140 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00709-010-0243-4)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21107619/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Protoplasma&title=Redox%20regulation%20of%20intercellular%20transport&author=Y%20Benitez-Alfonso&author=D%20Jackson&author=A%20Maule&volume=248&publication_year=2011&pages=131-140&pmid=21107619&doi=10.1007/s00709-010-0243-4&)\]
6.  Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y (1995) Controlling the false discovery rate – a practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. J R Stat Soc Series B Stat Methodol 57: 289–300 \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20R%20Stat%20Soc%20Series%20B%20Stat%20Methodol&title=Controlling%20the%20false%20discovery%20rate%20%E2%80%93%20a%20practical%20and%20powerful%20approach%20to%20multiple%20testing&author=Y%20Benjamini&author=Y%20Hochberg&volume=57&publication_year=1995&pages=289-300&)\]
7.  Bergmeyer HU. (1984) Methods of Enzymatic Analysis, Ed 3, Vol 6, Carbohydrates Verlag Chemie, Weinheim, Germany, pp. 2–11 \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Methods%20of%20Enzymatic%20Analysis&author=HU%20Bergmeyer&publication_year=1984&)\]
8.  Cantero A, Barthakur S, Bushart TJ, Chou S, Morgan RO, Fernandez MP, Clark GB, Roux SJ (2006) Expression profiling of the Arabidopsis annexin gene family during germination, de-etiolation and abiotic stress. Plant Physiol Biochem 44: 13–24 10.1016/j.plaphy.2006.02.002 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plaphy.2006.02.002)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16531057/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Physiol%20Biochem&title=Expression%20profiling%20of%20the%20Arabidopsis%20annexin%20gene%20family%20during%20germination,%20de-etiolation%20and%20abiotic%20stress.&author=A%20Cantero&author=S%20Barthakur&author=TJ%20Bushart&author=S%20Chou&author=RO%20Morgan&volume=44&publication_year=2006&pages=13-24&pmid=16531057&doi=10.1016/j.plaphy.2006.02.002&)\]
9.  Chaudhuri B, Hörmann F, Lalonde S, Brady SM, Orlando DA, Benfey P, Frommer WB (2008) Protonophore- and pH-insensitive glucose and sucrose accumulation detected by FRET nanosensors in Arabidopsis root tips. Plant J 56: 948–962 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-313X.2008.03652.x)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2752219/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18702670/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20J&title=Protonophore-%20and%20pH-insensitive%20glucose%20and%20sucrose%20accumulation%20detected%20by%20FRET%20nanosensors%20in%20Arabidopsis%20root%20tips&author=B%20Chaudhuri&author=F%20H%C3%B6rmann&author=S%20Lalonde&author=SM%20Brady&author=DA%20Orlando&volume=56&publication_year=2008&pages=948-962&pmid=18702670&doi=10.1111/j.1365-313X.2008.03652.x&)\]
10.  Choi WG, Toyota M, Kim SH, Hilleary R, Gilroy S (2014) Salt stress-induced Ca2+ waves are associated with rapid, long-distance root-to-shoot signaling in plants. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111: 6497–6502 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1319955111)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4035928/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24706854/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc%20Natl%20Acad%20Sci%20USA&title=Salt%20stress-induced%20Ca2+%20waves%20are%20associated%20with%20rapid,%20long-distance%20root-to-shoot%20signaling%20in%20plants&author=WG%20Choi&author=M%20Toyota&author=SH%20Kim&author=R%20Hilleary&author=S%20Gilroy&volume=111&publication_year=2014&pages=6497-6502&pmid=24706854&doi=10.1073/pnas.1319955111&)\]
11.  Clark GB, Dauwalder M, Roux SJ (1992) Purification and immunolocalization of an annexin-like protein in pea seedlings. Planta 187: 1–9 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00201617)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24177960/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Planta&title=Purification%20and%20immunolocalization%20of%20an%20annexin-like%20protein%20in%20pea%20seedlings&author=GB%20Clark&author=M%20Dauwalder&author=SJ%20Roux&volume=187&publication_year=1992&pages=1-9&pmid=24177960&doi=10.1007/BF00201617&)\]
12.  Clark GB, Sessions A, Eastburn DJ, Roux SJ (2001) Differential expression of members of the annexin multigene family in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 126: 1072–1084 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.126.3.1072)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC116464/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11457958/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Physiol&title=Differential%20expression%20of%20members%20of%20the%20annexin%20multigene%20family%20in%20Arabidopsis&author=GB%20Clark&author=A%20Sessions&author=DJ%20Eastburn&author=SJ%20Roux&volume=126&publication_year=2001&pages=1072-1084&pmid=11457958&doi=10.1104/pp.126.3.1072&)\]
13.  Clark GB, Morgan RO, Fernandez M-P, Roux SJ (2012) Evolutionary adaptation of plant annexins has diversified their molecular structures, interactions and functional roles. New Phytol 196: 695–712 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8137.2012.04308.x)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22994944/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=New%20Phytol&title=Evolutionary%20adaptation%20of%20plant%20annexins%20has%20diversified%20their%20molecular%20structures,%20interactions%20and%20functional%20roles&author=GB%20Clark&author=RO%20Morgan&author=M-P%20Fernandez&author=SJ%20Roux&volume=196&publication_year=2012&pages=695-712&pmid=22994944&doi=10.1111/j.1469-8137.2012.04308.x&)\]
14.  Dalal A, Kumar A, Yadav D, Gudla T, Viehhauser A, Dietz KJ, Kirti PB (2014) Alleviation of methyl viologen-mediated oxidative stress by Brassica juncea annexin-3 in transgenic Arabidopsis. Plant Sci 219-220: 9–18 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plantsci.2013.12.016)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24576759/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Sci&title=Alleviation%20of%20methyl%20viologen-mediated%20oxidative%20stress%20by%20Brassica%20juncea%20annexin-3%20in%20transgenic%20Arabidopsis&author=A%20Dalal&author=A%20Kumar&author=D%20Yadav&author=T%20Gudla&author=A%20Viehhauser&volume=219-220&publication_year=2014&pages=9-18&pmid=24576759&doi=10.1016/j.plantsci.2013.12.016&)\]
15.  Davies JM. (2014) Annexin-mediated calcium signalling in plants. Plants (Basel) 3: 128–140 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/plants3010128)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4844307/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27135495/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plants%20\(Basel\)&title=Annexin-mediated%20calcium%20signalling%20in%20plants&author=JM%20Davies&volume=3&publication_year=2014&pages=128-140&pmid=27135495&doi=10.3390/plants3010128&)\]
16.  De Schepper V, De Swaef T, Bauweraerts I, Steppe K (2013) Phloem transport: a review of mechanisms and controls. J Exp Bot 64: 4839–4850 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/ert302)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24106290/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Exp%20Bot&title=Phloem%20transport:%20a%20review%20of%20mechanisms%20and%20controls&author=V%20De%20Schepper&author=T%20De%20Swaef&author=I%20Bauweraerts&author=K%20Steppe&volume=64&publication_year=2013&pages=4839-4850&pmid=24106290&doi=10.1093/jxb/ert302&)\]
17.  Divya K, Jami SK, Kirti PB (2010) Constitutive expression of mustard annexin, AnnBj1 enhances abiotic stress tolerance and fiber quality in cotton under stress. Plant Mol Biol 73: 293–308 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11103-010-9615-6)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20148350/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Mol%20Biol&title=Constitutive%20expression%20of%20mustard%20annexin,%20AnnBj1%20enhances%20abiotic%20stress%20tolerance%20and%20fiber%20quality%20in%20cotton%20under%20stress&author=K%20Divya&author=SK%20Jami&author=PB%20Kirti&volume=73&publication_year=2010&pages=293-308&pmid=20148350&doi=10.1007/s11103-010-9615-6&)\]
18.  Dobrenel T, Caldana C, Hanson J, Robaglia C, Vincentz M, Veit B, Meyer C (2016) TOR Signaling and nutrient sensing. Annu Rev Plant Biol 67: 261–285 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-arplant-043014-114648)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26905651/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Annu%20Rev%20Plant%20Biol&title=TOR%20Signaling%20and%20nutrient%20sensing&author=T%20Dobrenel&author=C%20Caldana&author=J%20Hanson&author=C%20Robaglia&author=M%20Vincentz&volume=67&publication_year=2016&pages=261-285&pmid=26905651&doi=10.1146/annurev-arplant-043014-114648&)\]
19.  Dodds PN, Lagudah ES (2016) Starving the enemy. Science 354: 1377–1378 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aal4273)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27980171/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Science&title=Starving%20the%20enemy&author=PN%20Dodds&author=ES%20Lagudah&volume=354&publication_year=2016&pages=1377-1378&pmid=27980171&doi=10.1126/science.aal4273&)\]
20.  Evans MJ, Choi WG, Gilroy S, Morris RJ (2016) A ROS-assisted calcium wave dependent on the AtRBOHD NADPH Oxidase and TPC1 cation channel propagates the systemic response to salt stress. Plant Physiol 171: 1771–1784 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.16.00215)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4936552/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27261066/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Physiol&title=A%20ROS-assisted%20calcium%20wave%20dependent%20on%20the%20AtRBOHD%20NADPH%20Oxidase%20and%20TPC1%20cation%20channel%20propagates%20the%20systemic%20response%20to%20salt%20stress&author=MJ%20Evans&author=WG%20Choi&author=S%20Gilroy&author=RJ%20Morris&volume=171&publication_year=2016&pages=1771-1784&pmid=27261066&doi=10.1104/pp.16.00215&)\]
21.  Farrar JF, Jones CL (1986) Modification of respiration and carbohydrate status of barley roots by selective pruning. New Phytol 102: 513–521 \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=New%20Phytol&title=Modification%20of%20respiration%20and%20carbohydrate%20status%20of%20barley%20roots%20by%20selective%20pruning&author=JF%20Farrar&author=CL%20Jones&volume=102&publication_year=1986&pages=513-521&)\]
22.  Freixes S, Thibaud MC, Tardieu F, Muller B (2002) Root elongation and branching is related to local hexose concentration in _Arabidopsis thaliana_ seedlings. Plant Cell Environ 25: 1357–1366 \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Cell%20Environ&title=Root%20elongation%20and%20branching%20is%20related%20to%20local%20hexose%20concentration%20in%20Arabidopsis%20thaliana%20seedlings&author=S%20Freixes&author=MC%20Thibaud&author=F%20Tardieu&author=B%20Muller&volume=25&publication_year=2002&pages=1357-1366&)\]
23.  Gidrol X, Sabelli PA, Fern YS, Kush AK (1996) Annexin-like protein from Arabidopsis thaliana rescues delta oxyR mutant of _Escherichia coli_ from H2O2 stress. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93: 11268–11273 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.93.20.11268)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC38319/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8855345/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc%20Natl%20Acad%20Sci%20USA&title=Annexin-like%20protein%20from%20Arabidopsis%20thaliana%20rescues%20delta%20oxyR%20mutant%20of%20Escherichia%20coli%20from%20H2O2%20stress&author=X%20Gidrol&author=PA%20Sabelli&author=YS%20Fern&author=AK%20Kush&volume=93&publication_year=1996&pages=11268-11273&pmid=8855345&doi=10.1073/pnas.93.20.11268&)\]
24.  Guelette BS, Benning UF, Hoffmann-Benning S (2012) Identification of lipids and lipid-binding proteins in phloem exudates from _Arabidopsis thaliana_. J Exp Bot 63: 3603–3616 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/ers028)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3388829/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22442409/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Exp%20Bot&title=Identification%20of%20lipids%20and%20lipid-binding%20proteins%20in%20phloem%20exudates%20from%20Arabidopsis%20thaliana&author=BS%20Guelette&author=UF%20Benning&author=S%20Hoffmann-Benning&volume=63&publication_year=2012&pages=3603-3616&pmid=22442409&doi=10.1093/jxb/ers028&)\]
25.  Hong JH, Chu H, Zhang C, Ghosh D, Gong X, Xu J (2015) A quantitative analysis of stem cell homeostasis in the Arabidopsis columella root cap. Front Plant Sci 6: 206. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2015.00206)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4375977/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25870608/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Front%20Plant%20Sci&title=A%20quantitative%20analysis%20of%20stem%20cell%20homeostasis%20in%20the%20Arabidopsis%20columella%20root%20cap&author=JH%20Hong&author=H%20Chu&author=C%20Zhang&author=D%20Ghosh&author=X%20Gong&volume=6&publication_year=2015&pages=206&pmid=25870608&doi=10.3389/fpls.2015.00206&)\]
26.  Kehr J. (2006) Phloem sap proteins: their identities and potential roles in the interaction between plants and phloem-feeding insects. J Exp Bot 57: 767–774 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erj087)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16495410/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Exp%20Bot&title=Phloem%20sap%20proteins:%20their%20identities%20and%20potential%20roles%20in%20the%20interaction%20between%20plants%20and%20phloem-feeding%20insects&author=J%20Kehr&volume=57&publication_year=2006&pages=767-774&pmid=16495410&doi=10.1093/jxb/erj087&)\]
27.  Kircher S, Schopfer P (2012) Photosynthetic sucrose acts as cotyledon-derived long-distance signal to control root growth during early seedling development in Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109: 11217–11221 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1203746109)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3396492/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22733756/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc%20Natl%20Acad%20Sci%20USA&title=Photosynthetic%20sucrose%20acts%20as%20cotyledon-derived%20long-distance%20signal%20to%20control%20root%20growth%20during%20early%20seedling%20development%20in%20Arabidopsis&author=S%20Kircher&author=P%20Schopfer&volume=109&publication_year=2012&pages=11217-11221&pmid=22733756&doi=10.1073/pnas.1203746109&)\]
28.  Knoblauch M, Vendrell M, de Leau E, Paterlini A, Knox K, Ross-Elliot T, Reinders A, Brockman SA, Ward J, Oparka K (2015) Multispectral phloem-mobile probes: properties and applications. Plant Physiol 167: 1211–1220 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.114.255414)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4378168/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25653316/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Physiol&title=Multispectral%20phloem-mobile%20probes:%20properties%20and%20applications&author=M%20Knoblauch&author=M%20Vendrell&author=E%20de%20Leau&author=A%20Paterlini&author=K%20Knox&volume=167&publication_year=2015&pages=1211-1220&pmid=25653316&doi=10.1104/pp.114.255414&)\]
29.  Ko D, Helariutta Y (2017) Shoot-root communication in flowering plants. Curr Biol 27: R973–R978 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2017.06.054)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28898670/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr%20Biol&title=Shoot-root%20communication%20in%20flowering%20plants&author=D%20Ko&author=Y%20Helariutta&volume=27&publication_year=2017&pages=R973-R978&pmid=28898670&doi=10.1016/j.cub.2017.06.054&)\]
30.  Kobayashi K, Baba S, Obayashi T, Sato M, Toyooka K, Keränen M, Aro EM, Fukaki H, Ohta H, Sugimoto K, et al. (2012) Regulation of root greening by light and auxin/cytokinin signaling in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 24: 1081–1095 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.111.092254)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3336121/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22415275/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Cell&title=Regulation%20of%20root%20greening%20by%20light%20and%20auxin/cytokinin%20signaling%20in%20Arabidopsis&author=K%20Kobayashi&author=S%20Baba&author=T%20Obayashi&author=M%20Sato&author=K%20Toyooka&volume=24&publication_year=2012&pages=1081-1095&pmid=22415275&doi=10.1105/tpc.111.092254&)\]
31.  Koch KE. (1996) Carbohydrate-modulated gene expression in plants. Annu Rev Plant Physiol Plant Mol Biol 47: 509–540 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.arplant.47.1.509)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15012299/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Annu%20Rev%20Plant%20Physiol%20Plant%20Mol%20Biol&title=Carbohydrate-modulated%20gene%20expression%20in%20plants&author=KE%20Koch&volume=47&publication_year=1996&pages=509-540&pmid=15012299&doi=10.1146/annurev.arplant.47.1.509&)\]
32.  Konopka-Postupolska D, Clark G (2017) Annexins as overlooked regulators of membrane trafficking in plant cells. Int J Mol Sci 18: E863. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms18040863)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5412444/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28422051/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int%20J%20Mol%20Sci&title=Annexins%20as%20overlooked%20regulators%20of%20membrane%20trafficking%20in%20plant%20cells&author=D%20Konopka-Postupolska&author=G%20Clark&volume=18&publication_year=2017&pages=E863&pmid=28422051&doi=10.3390/ijms18040863&)\]
33.  Konopka-Postupolska D, Clark G, Goch G, Debski J, Floras K, Cantero A, Fijolek B, Roux S, Hennig J (2009) The role of annexin 1 in drought stress in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 150: 1394–1410 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.109.135228)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2705051/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19482919/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Physiol&title=The%20role%20of%20annexin%201%20in%20drought%20stress%20in%20Arabidopsis&author=D%20Konopka-Postupolska&author=G%20Clark&author=G%20Goch&author=J%20Debski&author=K%20Floras&volume=150&publication_year=2009&pages=1394-1410&pmid=19482919&doi=10.1104/pp.109.135228&)\]
34.  Konopka-Postupolska D, Clark G, Hofmann A (2011) Structure, function and membrane interactions of plant annexins: an update. Plant Sci 181: 230–241 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plantsci.2011.05.013)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21763533/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Sci&title=Structure,%20function%20and%20membrane%20interactions%20of%20plant%20annexins:%20an%20update&author=D%20Konopka-Postupolska&author=G%20Clark&author=A%20Hofmann&volume=181&publication_year=2011&pages=230-241&pmid=21763533&doi=10.1016/j.plantsci.2011.05.013&)\]
35.  Kühn C. (2016) Review: Post-translational cross-talk between brassinosteroid and sucrose signaling. Plant Sci 248: 75–81 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plantsci.2016.04.012)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27181949/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Sci&title=Review:%20Post-translational%20cross-talk%20between%20brassinosteroid%20and%20sucrose%20signaling&author=C%20K%C3%BChn&volume=248&publication_year=2016&pages=75-81&pmid=27181949&doi=10.1016/j.plantsci.2016.04.012&)\]
36.  Laohavisit A, Davies JM (2011) Annexins. New Phytol 189: 40–53 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8137.2010.03533.x)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21083562/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=New%20Phytol&title=Annexins&author=A%20Laohavisit&author=JM%20Davies&volume=189&publication_year=2011&pages=40-53&pmid=21083562&doi=10.1111/j.1469-8137.2010.03533.x&)\]
37.  Laohavisit A, Brown AT, Cicuta P, Davies JM (2010) Annexins: components of the calcium and reactive oxygen signaling network. Plant Physiol 152: 1824–1829 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.109.145458)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2850007/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20154100/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Physiol&title=Annexins:%20components%20of%20the%20calcium%20and%20reactive%20oxygen%20signaling%20network&author=A%20Laohavisit&author=AT%20Brown&author=P%20Cicuta&author=JM%20Davies&volume=152&publication_year=2010&pages=1824-1829&pmid=20154100&doi=10.1104/pp.109.145458&)\]
38.  Lastdrager J, Hanson J, Smeekens S (2014) Sugar signals and the control of plant growth and development. J Exp Bot 65: 799–807 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/ert474)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24453229/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Exp%20Bot&title=Sugar%20signals%20and%20the%20control%20of%20plant%20growth%20and%20development&author=J%20Lastdrager&author=J%20Hanson&author=S%20Smeekens&volume=65&publication_year=2014&pages=799-807&pmid=24453229&doi=10.1093/jxb/ert474&)\]
39.  Lemoine R, La Camera S, Atanassova R, Dédaldéchamp F, Allario T, Pourtau N, Bonnemain JL, Laloi M, Coutos-Thévenot P, Maurousset L, et al. (2013) Source-to-sink transport of sugar and regulation by environmental factors. Front Plant Sci 4: 272. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2013.00272)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3721551/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23898339/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Front%20Plant%20Sci&title=Source-to-sink%20transport%20of%20sugar%20and%20regulation%20by%20environmental%20factors&author=R%20Lemoine&author=S%20La%20Camera&author=R%20Atanassova&author=F%20D%C3%A9dald%C3%A9champ&author=T%20Allario&volume=4&publication_year=2013&pages=272&pmid=23898339&doi=10.3389/fpls.2013.00272&)\]
40.  Li L, Sheen J (2016) Dynamic and diverse sugar signaling. Curr Opin Plant Biol 33: 116–125 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbi.2016.06.018)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5050104/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27423125/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr%20Opin%20Plant%20Biol&title=Dynamic%20and%20diverse%20sugar%20signaling&author=L%20Li&author=J%20Sheen&volume=33&publication_year=2016&pages=116-125&pmid=27423125&doi=10.1016/j.pbi.2016.06.018&)\]
41.  Liao C, Zheng Y, Guo Y (2017) MYB30 transcription factor regulates oxidative and heat stress responses through ANNEXIN-mediated cytosolic calcium signaling in Arabidopsis. New Phytol 216: 163–177 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.14679)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28726305/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=New%20Phytol&title=MYB30%20transcription%20factor%20regulates%20oxidative%20and%20heat%20stress%20responses%20through%20ANNEXIN-mediated%20cytosolic%20calcium%20signaling%20in%20Arabidopsis&author=C%20Liao&author=Y%20Zheng&author=Y%20Guo&volume=216&publication_year=2017&pages=163-177&pmid=28726305&doi=10.1111/nph.14679&)\]
42.  Livak KJ, Schmittgen TD (2001) Analysis of relative gene expression data using real-time quantitative PCR and the 2(-Δ Δ C(T)) Method. Methods 25: 402–408 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1006/meth.2001.1262)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11846609/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Methods&title=Analysis%20of%20relative%20gene%20expression%20data%20using%20real-time%20quantitative%20PCR%20and%20the%202\(-%CE%94%20%CE%94%20C\(T\)\)%20Method&author=KJ%20Livak&author=TD%20Schmittgen&volume=25&publication_year=2001&pages=402-408&pmid=11846609&doi=10.1006/meth.2001.1262&)\]
43.  Ljung K, Nemhauser JL, Perata P (2015) New mechanistic links between sugar and hormone signalling networks. Curr Opin Plant Biol 25: 130–137 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbi.2015.05.022)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26037392/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr%20Opin%20Plant%20Biol&title=New%20mechanistic%20links%20between%20sugar%20and%20hormone%20signalling%20networks&author=K%20Ljung&author=JL%20Nemhauser&author=P%20Perata&volume=25&publication_year=2015&pages=130-137&pmid=26037392&doi=10.1016/j.pbi.2015.05.022&)\]
44.  Luna E, Pastor V, Robert J, Flors V, Mauch-Mani B, Ton J (2011) Callose deposition: a multifaceted plant defense response. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 24: 183–193 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1094/MPMI-07-10-0149)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20955078/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol%20Plant%20Microbe%20Interact&title=Callose%20deposition:%20a%20multifaceted%20plant%20defense%20response&author=E%20Luna&author=V%20Pastor&author=J%20Robert&author=V%20Flors&author=B%20Mauch-Mani&volume=24&publication_year=2011&pages=183-193&pmid=20955078&doi=10.1094/MPMI-07-10-0149&)\]
45.  Martin T, Oswald O, Graham IA (2002) Arabidopsis seedling growth, storage lipid mobilization, and photosynthetic gene expression are regulated by carbon:nitrogen availability. Plant Physiol 128: 472–481 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.010475)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC148910/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11842151/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Physiol&title=Arabidopsis%20seedling%20growth,%20storage%20lipid%20mobilization,%20and%20photosynthetic%20gene%20expression%20are%20regulated%20by%20carbon:nitrogen%20availability&author=T%20Martin&author=O%20Oswald&author=IA%20Graham&volume=128&publication_year=2002&pages=472-481&pmid=11842151&doi=10.1104/pp.010475&)\]
46.  Mason MG, Ross JJ, Babst BA, Wienclaw BN, Beveridge CA (2014) Sugar demand, not auxin, is the initial regulator of apical dominance. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111: 6092–6097 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1322045111)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4000805/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24711430/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc%20Natl%20Acad%20Sci%20USA&title=Sugar%20demand,%20not%20auxin,%20is%20the%20initial%20regulator%20of%20apical%20dominance&author=MG%20Mason&author=JJ%20Ross&author=BA%20Babst&author=BN%20Wienclaw&author=CA%20Beveridge&volume=111&publication_year=2014&pages=6092-6097&pmid=24711430&doi=10.1073/pnas.1322045111&)\]
47.  Moore B, Zhou L, Rolland F, Hall Q, Cheng WH, Liu YX, Hwang I, Jones T, Sheen J (2003) Role of the Arabidopsis glucose sensor HXK1 in nutrient, light, and hormonal signaling. Science 300: 332–336 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1080585)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12690200/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Science&title=Role%20of%20the%20Arabidopsis%20glucose%20sensor%20HXK1%20in%20nutrient,%20light,%20and%20hormonal%20signaling&author=B%20Moore&author=L%20Zhou&author=F%20Rolland&author=Q%20Hall&author=WH%20Cheng&volume=300&publication_year=2003&pages=332-336&pmid=12690200&doi=10.1126/science.1080585&)\]
48.  Morgan RO, Martin-Almedina S, Iglesias JM, Gonzalez-Florez MI, Fernandez MP (2004) Evolutionary perspective on annexin calcium-binding domains. Biochim Biophys Acta 1742: 133–140 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbamcr.2004.09.010)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15590063/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Biochim%20Biophys%20Acta&title=Evolutionary%20perspective%20on%20annexin%20calcium-binding%20domains&author=RO%20Morgan&author=S%20Martin-Almedina&author=JM%20Iglesias&author=MI%20Gonzalez-Florez&author=MP%20Fernandez&volume=1742&publication_year=2004&pages=133-140&pmid=15590063&doi=10.1016/j.bbamcr.2004.09.010&)\]
49.  Morgan RO, Martin-Almedina S, Garcia M, Jhoncon-Kooyip J, Fernandez MP (2006) Deciphering function and mechanism of calcium-binding proteins from their evolutionary imprints. Biochim Biophys Acta 1763: 1238–1249 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbamcr.2006.09.028)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17092580/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Biochim%20Biophys%20Acta&title=Deciphering%20function%20and%20mechanism%20of%20calcium-binding%20proteins%20from%20their%20evolutionary%20imprints&author=RO%20Morgan&author=S%20Martin-Almedina&author=M%20Garcia&author=J%20Jhoncon-Kooyip&author=MP%20Fernandez&volume=1763&publication_year=2006&pages=1238-1249&pmid=17092580&doi=10.1016/j.bbamcr.2006.09.028&)\]
50.  Oparka KJ, Prior DAM, Duckett CM, Fisher DB (1994) Real-time imaging of phloem unloading in the root tip of Arabidopsis. Plant J 6: 759–766 \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20J&title=Real-time%20imaging%20of%20phloem%20unloading%20in%20the%20root%20tip%20of%20Arabidopsis&author=KJ%20Oparka&author=DAM%20Prior&author=CM%20Duckett&author=DB%20Fisher&volume=6&publication_year=1994&pages=759-766&)\]
51.  Pego JV, Kortstee AJ, Huijser C, Smeekens SC (2000) Photosynthesis, sugars and the regulation of gene expression. J Exp Bot 51: 407–416 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/jexbot/51.suppl_1.407)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10938849/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Exp%20Bot&title=Photosynthesis,%20sugars%20and%20the%20regulation%20of%20gene%20expression&author=JV%20Pego&author=AJ%20Kortstee&author=C%20Huijser&author=SC%20Smeekens&volume=51&publication_year=2000&pages=407-416&pmid=10938849&doi=10.1093/jexbot/51.suppl_1.407&)\]
52.  Richards SL, Laohavisit A, Mortimer JC, Shabala L, Swarbreck SM, Shabala S, Davies JM (2014) Annexin 1 regulates the H2O2\-induced calcium signature in _Arabidopsis thaliana_ roots. Plant J 77: 136–145 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/tpj.12372)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24180429/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20J&title=Annexin%201%20regulates%20the%20H2O2-induced%20calcium%20signature%20in%20Arabidopsis%20thaliana%20roots&author=SL%20Richards&author=A%20Laohavisit&author=JC%20Mortimer&author=L%20Shabala&author=SM%20Swarbreck&volume=77&publication_year=2014&pages=136-145&pmid=24180429&doi=10.1111/tpj.12372&)\]
53.  Ross-Elliott TJ, Jensen KH, Haaning KS, Wager BM, Knoblauch J, Howell AH, Mullendore DL, Monteith AG, Paultre D, Yan D, et al. (2017) Phloem unloading in Arabidopsis roots is convective and regulated by the phloem-pole pericycle. eLife 6: e24125. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.24125)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5365319/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28230527/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=eLife&title=Phloem%20unloading%20in%20Arabidopsis%20roots%20is%20convective%20and%20regulated%20by%20the%20phloem-pole%20pericycle&author=TJ%20Ross-Elliott&author=KH%20Jensen&author=KS%20Haaning&author=BM%20Wager&author=J%20Knoblauch&volume=6&publication_year=2017&pages=e24125&pmid=28230527&doi=10.7554/eLife.24125&)\]
54.  Sager R, Lee JY (2014) Plasmodesmata in integrated cell signalling: insights from development and environmental signals and stresses. J Exp Bot 65: 6337–6358 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/eru365)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4303807/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25262225/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Exp%20Bot&title=Plasmodesmata%20in%20integrated%20cell%20signalling:%20insights%20from%20development%20and%20environmental%20signals%20and%20stresses&author=R%20Sager&author=JY%20Lee&volume=65&publication_year=2014&pages=6337-6358&pmid=25262225&doi=10.1093/jxb/eru365&)\]
55.  Sami F, Yusuf M, Faizan M, Faraz A, Hayat S (2016) Role of sugars under abiotic stress. Plant Physiol Biochem 109: 54–61 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plaphy.2016.09.005)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27639065/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Physiol%20Biochem&title=Role%20of%20sugars%20under%20abiotic%20stress&author=F%20Sami&author=M%20Yusuf&author=M%20Faizan&author=A%20Faraz&author=S%20Hayat&volume=109&publication_year=2016&pages=54-61&pmid=27639065&doi=10.1016/j.plaphy.2016.09.005&)\]
56.  Sheen J. (1990) Metabolic repression of transcription in higher plants. Plant Cell 2: 1027–1038 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.2.10.1027)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC159951/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2136626/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Cell&title=Metabolic%20repression%20of%20transcription%20in%20higher%20plants&author=J%20Sheen&volume=2&publication_year=1990&pages=1027-1038&pmid=2136626&doi=10.1105/tpc.2.10.1027&)\]
57.  Smeekens S, Ma J, Hanson J, Rolland F (2010) Sugar signals and molecular networks controlling plant growth. Curr Opin Plant Biol 13: 274–279 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbi.2009.12.002)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20056477/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr%20Opin%20Plant%20Biol&title=Sugar%20signals%20and%20molecular%20networks%20controlling%20plant%20growth&author=S%20Smeekens&author=J%20Ma&author=J%20Hanson&author=F%20Rolland&volume=13&publication_year=2010&pages=274-279&pmid=20056477&doi=10.1016/j.pbi.2009.12.002&)\]
58.  Stadler R, Wright KM, Lauterbach C, Amon G, Gahrtz M, Feuerstein A, Oparka KJ, Sauer N (2005) Expression of GFP-fusions in Arabidopsis companion cells reveals non-specific protein trafficking into sieve elements and identifies a novel post-phloem domain in roots. Plant J 41: 319–331 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02298.x)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15634207/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20J&title=Expression%20of%20GFP-fusions%20in%20Arabidopsis%20companion%20cells%20reveals%20non-specific%20protein%20trafficking%20into%20sieve%20elements%20and%20identifies%20a%20novel%20post-phloem%20domain%20in%20roots&author=R%20Stadler&author=KM%20Wright&author=C%20Lauterbach&author=G%20Amon&author=M%20Gahrtz&volume=41&publication_year=2005&pages=319-331&pmid=15634207&doi=10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02298.x&)\]
59.  Stitt M, Zeeman SC (2012) Starch turnover: pathways, regulation and role in growth. Curr Opin Plant Biol 15: 282–292 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbi.2012.03.016)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22541711/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr%20Opin%20Plant%20Biol&title=Starch%20turnover:%20pathways,%20regulation%20and%20role%20in%20growth&author=M%20Stitt&author=SC%20Zeeman&volume=15&publication_year=2012&pages=282-292&pmid=22541711&doi=10.1016/j.pbi.2012.03.016&)\]
60.  Stonebloom S, Brunkard JO, Cheung AC, Jiang K, Feldman L, Zambryski P (2012) Redox states of plastids and mitochondria differentially regulate intercellular transport via plasmodesmata. Plant Physiol 158: 190–199 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.111.186130)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3252087/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22074709/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Physiol&title=Redox%20states%20of%20plastids%20and%20mitochondria%20differentially%20regulate%20intercellular%20transport%20via%20plasmodesmata&author=S%20Stonebloom&author=JO%20Brunkard&author=AC%20Cheung&author=K%20Jiang&author=L%20Feldman&volume=158&publication_year=2012&pages=190-199&pmid=22074709&doi=10.1104/pp.111.186130&)\]
61.  Thieme CJ, Rojas-Triana M, Stecyk E, Schudoma C, Zhang W, Yang L, Miñambres M, Walther D, Schulze WX, Paz-Ares J, et al. (2015) Endogenous Arabidopsis messenger RNAs transported to distant tissues. Nat Plants 1: 15025. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nplants.2015.25)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27247031/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Plants&title=Endogenous%20Arabidopsis%20messenger%20RNAs%20transported%20to%20distant%20tissues&author=CJ%20Thieme&author=M%20Rojas-Triana&author=E%20Stecyk&author=C%20Schudoma&author=W%20Zhang&volume=1&publication_year=2015&pages=15025&pmid=27247031&doi=10.1038/nplants.2015.25&)\]
62.  Thompson M, Gamage D, Hirotsu N, Martin A, Seneweera S (2017) Effects of elevated carbon dioxide on photosynthesis and carbon partitioning: A perspective on root sugar sensing and hormonal crosstalk. Front Physiol 8: 578. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2017.00578)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5550704/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28848452/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Front%20Physiol&title=Effects%20of%20elevated%20carbon%20dioxide%20on%20photosynthesis%20and%20carbon%20partitioning:%20A%20perspective%20on%20root%20sugar%20sensing%20and%20hormonal%20crosstalk&author=M%20Thompson&author=D%20Gamage&author=N%20Hirotsu&author=A%20Martin&author=S%20Seneweera&volume=8&publication_year=2017&pages=578&pmid=28848452&doi=10.3389/fphys.2017.00578&)\]
63.  Van Verk MC, Hickman R, Pieterse CM, Van Wees SC (2013) RNA-Seq: revelation of the messengers. Trends Plant Sci 18: 175–179 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tplants.2013.02.001)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23481128/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Trends%20Plant%20Sci&title=RNA-Seq:%20revelation%20of%20the%20messengers&author=MC%20Van%20Verk&author=R%20Hickman&author=CM%20Pieterse&author=SC%20Van%20Wees&volume=18&publication_year=2013&pages=175-179&pmid=23481128&doi=10.1016/j.tplants.2013.02.001&)\]
64.  Wang X, Ma X, Wang H, Li B, Clark G, Guo Y, Roux S, Sun D, Tang W (2015) Proteomic study of microsomal proteins reveals a key role for Arabidopsis annexin 1 in mediating heat stress-induced increase in intracellular calcium levels. Mol Cell Proteomics 14: 686–694 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M114.042697)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4349987/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25587034/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol%20Cell%20Proteomics&title=Proteomic%20study%20of%20microsomal%20proteins%20reveals%20a%20key%20role%20for%20Arabidopsis%20annexin%201%20in%20mediating%20heat%20stress-induced%20increase%20in%20intracellular%20calcium%20levels&author=X%20Wang&author=X%20Ma&author=H%20Wang&author=B%20Li&author=G%20Clark&volume=14&publication_year=2015&pages=686-694&pmid=25587034&doi=10.1074/mcp.M114.042697&)\]
65.  Wingler A. (2018) Transitioning to the next phase: the role of sugar signaling throughout the plant life cycle. Plant Physiol 176: 1075–1084 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.17.01229)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5813577/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28974627/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Physiol&title=Transitioning%20to%20the%20next%20phase:%20the%20role%20of%20sugar%20signaling%20throughout%20the%20plant%20life%20cycle&author=A%20Wingler&volume=176&publication_year=2018&pages=1075-1084&pmid=28974627&doi=10.1104/pp.17.01229&)\]
66.  Yu S, Cao L, Zhou CM, Zhang TQ, Lian H, Sun Y, Wu J, Huang J, Wang G, Wang JW (2013) Sugar is an endogenous cue for juvenile-to-adult phase transition in plants. eLife 2: e00269. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.00269)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3610343/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23543845/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=eLife&title=Sugar%20is%20an%20endogenous%20cue%20for%20juvenile-to-adult%20phase%20transition%20in%20plants&author=S%20Yu&author=L%20Cao&author=CM%20Zhou&author=TQ%20Zhang&author=H%20Lian&volume=2&publication_year=2013&pages=e00269&pmid=23543845&doi=10.7554/eLife.00269&)\]
67.  Yu SM, Lo SF, Ho TD (2015) Source-sink communication: Regulated by hormone, nutrient, and stress cross-signaling. Trends Plant Sci 20: 844–857 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tplants.2015.10.009)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26603980/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Trends%20Plant%20Sci&title=Source-sink%20communication:%20Regulated%20by%20hormone,%20nutrient,%20and%20stress%20cross-signaling&author=SM%20Yu&author=SF%20Lo&author=TD%20Ho&volume=20&publication_year=2015&pages=844-857&pmid=26603980&doi=10.1016/j.tplants.2015.10.009&)\]
68.  Zavaliev R, Ueki S, Epel BL, Citovsky V (2011) Biology of callose (β-1,3-glucan) turnover at plasmodesmata. Protoplasma 248: 117–130 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00709-010-0247-0)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9473521/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21116665/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Protoplasma&title=Biology%20of%20callose%20\(%CE%B2-1,3-glucan\)%20turnover%20at%20plasmodesmata&author=R%20Zavaliev&author=S%20Ueki&author=BL%20Epel&author=V%20Citovsky&volume=248&publication_year=2011&pages=117-130&pmid=21116665&doi=10.1007/s00709-010-0247-0&)\]