---
title: "Genome-Wide Analysis of the PERK Gene Family in Brassica napus L. and Their Potential Roles in Clubroot Disease"
authors: ["Zeyu Zhang", "Tongyu Fu", "Cong Zhou", "Fan Liu", "Lingyi Zeng", "Li Ren", "Chaobo Tong", "Lijiang Liu", "Li Xu"]
journal: "International Journal of Molecular Sciences"
date: "2025 Mar 17"
doi: "10.3390/ijms26062685"
source_url: "https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11942576/"
---

# Genome-Wide Analysis of the PERK Gene Family in Brassica napus L. and Their Potential Roles in Clubroot Disease

*International Journal of Molecular Sciences*, 2025 Mar 17, [doi:10.3390/ijms26062685](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms26062685)

### Zeyu Zhang
### Tongyu Fu
### Cong Zhou
### Fan Liu
### Lingyi Zeng
### Li Ren
### Chaobo Tong
### Lijiang Liu
### Li Xu

## Abstract

The proline-rich extensin-like receptor kinase (_PERK_) gene family is crucial to various molecular and cellular processes in plants. We identified 50 _PERK_ genes in _Brassica napus_ to explore their evolutionary dynamics, structural diversity, and functional roles. These genes were grouped into four classes and unevenly distributed across 18 chromosomes. Phylogenetic studies and Ka/Ks ratios revealed purifying selection during the evolution process. They exhibited significant diversification in gene length, molecular weight, and isoelectric points, suggesting specialized function. Gene structure and motif analyses revealed variations among the _BnPERK_ family members, with conserved tyrosine kinase domains suggesting functional importance. _Cis_\-element analysis predicted the involvement in hormone signaling and stress responses. Expression profiling showed diverse patterns across tissues and hormone treatments, highlighting potential roles in growth regulation and hormone signaling. Protein–protein interaction networks suggested BnPERK proteins interact with a wide array of proteins, implicating them in multiple biological processes. The transcriptional downregulation of four _BnPERK_ genes upon _Plasmodiophora brassicae_ infection implied a role in clubroot disease response. Furthermore, the Arabidopsis _perk9_ mutant displayed relieved disease severity and enhanced basal immune response, suggesting the negative role of _PERK9_ in plant immunity. The study highlighted the potential role of _BnPERKs_ in crop improvement strategies against clubroot disease.

**Keywords:** _Brassica napus_, _PERK_ gene family, receptor-like kinase, hormones, clubroot disease

## 1\. Introduction

Receptor-like kinases (RLKs) constitute the largest plant receptor family and are located on the cell surface to perceive and transduce a wide range of signals \[[1](#B1-ijms-26-02685)\]. By initiating intracellular signaling cascades, RLKs play pivotal roles in various molecular and cellular processes, including plant development, stress response, and signal transduction \[[2](#B2-ijms-26-02685)\]. These versatile receptors are capable of sensing plant hormones, secreted peptides, and molecules derived from pathogens involved in plant defense response \[[3](#B3-ijms-26-02685)\]. For example, RLKs recognize pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), which trigger the Pattern-Triggered Immunity (PTI) response, activating signaling pathways that defend against pathogen invasion.

RLKs typically consist of three key domains: an extracellular domain, a transmembrane domain, and an intracellular kinase domain \[[4](#B4-ijms-26-02685)\]. The extracellular domain, characterized by significant structural diversity, forms the basis for classifying RLKs into different subclasses based on their motif structures. Among these, the proline-rich extensin-like receptor kinases (PERKs) represent a distinct group characterized by a proline-rich extracellular domain \[[5](#B5-ijms-26-02685)\]. Interestingly, while some _PERKs_ like _BnPERK1_ and _AtPERK4_ locate on the plasma membrane, _AtPERK13_ has been demonstrated to anchor to the cell wall \[[6](#B6-ijms-26-02685),[7](#B7-ijms-26-02685),[8](#B8-ijms-26-02685),[9](#B9-ijms-26-02685)\]. Functionally, the intracellular kinase domain of RLKs contains conserved motifs that exhibit kinase activity, which has been observed in _BnPERK1_ and _AtPERK4_ \[[7](#B7-ijms-26-02685),[10](#B10-ijms-26-02685)\].

In _Arabidopsis thaliana_, the _PERK_ gene family consists of 15 members, some of which show specific expression patterns in roots and floral organs \[[11](#B11-ijms-26-02685)\]. However, some _AtPERK_ genes exhibit broad expression patterns across various tissues, such as _AtPERK1,_ which is ubiquitously expressed, suggesting its involvement in diverse molecular and cellular processes. Recent studies have elucidated the regulation of _PERKs_ in response to different stress conditions \[[5](#B5-ijms-26-02685)\]. For example, the expression of _TaPERKs_ in wheat and _GhPERKs_ in cotton is significantly influenced by abiotic stresses such as heat, drought, and salinity \[[12](#B12-ijms-26-02685),[13](#B13-ijms-26-02685)\]. In _A. thaliana_, _AtPERK13_ has been shown to respond to nutrient deficiencies such as phosphate, nitrogen, and iron deprivation, highlighting the role of _PERKs_ in maintaining nutrient homeostasis and adaptation \[[9](#B9-ijms-26-02685)\]. In rice, the _PERK_ gene Z15 is activated by moderately low temperatures, emphasizing the adaptability of _PERKs_ to diverse environmental cues \[[14](#B14-ijms-26-02685)\]. Additionally, _PERKs_ have been implicated in plant defense against pathogens. For example, the expression of _TaPERKs_ is influenced by fungal pathogens, and _BnPERK1_ has been shown to respond to the pathogen _Sclerotinia sclerotiorum_ \[[7](#B7-ijms-26-02685),[12](#B12-ijms-26-02685),[15](#B15-ijms-26-02685)\]. In summary, _PERKs_ are versatile players in response to various stresses.

_PERKs_ also play essential roles in plant hormone signaling. Several studies have highlighted the involvement of _PERKs_ in the regulation of growth and development in response to hormonal signals \[[10](#B10-ijms-26-02685),[13](#B13-ijms-26-02685),[16](#B16-ijms-26-02685)\]. For instance, _AtPERK4_ has been implicated in abscisic acid (ABA) signaling during root cell elongation \[[10](#B10-ijms-26-02685)\]. Furthermore, the expression profiles of _OsPERKs_ and _GhPERKs_ have shown differential expression patterns under different plant hormone treatments, including ABA, methyl jasmona (MeJA), gibberellin (GA), salicylic acid (SA), and auxin \[[13](#B13-ijms-26-02685),[16](#B16-ijms-26-02685)\]. The intricate regulation of _PERKs_ by different plant hormones suggests their pivotal role in integrating hormonal signaling pathways to coordinate plant growth and stress responses.

In summary, _PERK_ genes are known to be critical to plant growth, development, and stress responses. Despite the essential roles of _PERKs_ in various processes across various plant species, comprehensive studies on the _PERK_ gene family in _Brassica napus_ (oilseed rape), an economically important crop serving as both an edible oil source and animal feed, are still limited \[[17](#B17-ijms-26-02685)\]. This allopolyploid species (AACC, 2n = 38), formed by the hybridization between two diploid ancestors, _B. rapa_ (AA = 20) and _B. oleracea_ (CC = 18), emerged approximately 6800 to 12,500 years ago \[[18](#B18-ijms-26-02685)\]. While a comprehensive study of _BrPERK_ genes has been completed in male-sterile _B. rapa_ plants, identifying 25 _BrPERK_ genes and exploring their potential role in male sterility, studies in _B. napus_ remain scarce \[[19](#B19-ijms-26-02685)\].

This study aimed to provide a comprehensive study of _BnPERK_ genes to include the exploration of its evolutionary history, chromosome location, and gene structure through various computational approaches. Tissue-specific and hormone treatment gene expression patterns were examined using available transcriptome datasets. Additionally, the study also investigated the role of _BnPERKs_ in response to the obligate pathogen _Plasmodiophora brassicae,_ which causes clubroot disease in _Brassica_ species. By providing insights into the molecular and functional roles of _BnPERKs_, this study will contribute to a deeper understanding of this often-overlooked plant receptor subfamily and its potential applications in crop improvement.

## 2\. Results

### 2.1. Identification and Phylogenetic Analysis of BnPERKs in Brassica napus

Fifty _PERK_ genes were identified within the _B. napus_ ‘ZS11’ genome ([Supplementary Tables S2 and S3](#app1-ijms-26-02685)). Identification was accomplished through an extensive BLAST search using 15 _AtPERK_ sequences, revealing a higher number of _BnPERK_ genes compared with those reported in _Arabidopsis_, Chinese cabbage, soybean, rice, sorghum, maize, cotton, and wheat ([Supplementary Table S4](#app1-ijms-26-02685)). The BnPERK family of proteins exhibited varying lengths, ranging from 187 to 921 amino acids. Their molecular weights (MWs) spanned from 20.63 to 102.21 kDa, with BnPERK15C2 and BnPERK15A2 representing the extremes. Additionally, the isoelectric points (pIs) ranged from 5.26 to 8.59 ([Supplementary Table S5](#app1-ijms-26-02685)). The data plots illustrated that BnPERK proteins exhibit a broad spectrum of MW and pI. Moreover, predictions of subcellular localization suggested that most BnPERK proteins were located on the plasma membrane and endomembrane system, while others were associated with the nucleus and chloroplast ([Supplementary Table S5](#app1-ijms-26-02685)).

To investigate the phylogenetic distribution and evolutionary relationships of the _PERK_ gene family, a phylogenetic tree was constructed using 50 BnPERK protein sequences and 15 AtPERK protein sequences by MEGA11 using the maximum likelihood (ML) method ([Supplementary Table S6](#app1-ijms-26-02685)). The _BnPERK_ genes were categorized into four groups (I–IV) based on sequence similarity and functional domain analysis. Group III, being the largest group, included 5 paralogs with 24 _BnPERK_ genes. Group I followed, containing 6 paralogs with 21 _BnPERK_ genes. Group II included 3 paralogs, with 3 _BnPERK_ genes, while Group IV contained only 1 paralog, with 3 _BnPERK_ genes ([Figure 1](#ijms-26-02685-f001)). All _AtPERK_ genes, with the exception of _AtPERK2_, exhibited a close syntenic association with the 50 _BnPERK_ genes. Most _AtPERK_ genes corresponded to 2–6 orthologous genes in _B. napus_, each comprising orthologous genes from both the A and C subgenomes of _B. napus_. Notably, _AtPERK3_ was associated with a single ortholog, _BnPERK03A1_, as its counterpart in the C subgenome appeared to have been lost. These results suggest that genome rearrangement and gene loss occurred during the polyploidization of _B. napus_.

### 2.2. Chromosomal Distribution and Collinearity Analysis of BnPERK Genes

The 50 _BnPERK_ genes were evenly distributed across the A and C subgenomes of _B. napus_, with 25 genes in each ([Figure 2](#ijms-26-02685-f002) and [Supplementary Figure S1](#app1-ijms-26-02685)). These genes were dispersed among all chromosomes, except for A10. The highest concentration of genes was on the chromosome A1, which harbored seven genes, followed by six genes on C6 and five genes on A7. Single _BnPERK_ genes were identified on chromosomes A2, A3, A4, A5, C4, and C9. The results indicated an irregular arrangement of the _PERK_ gene family across the rapeseed chromosomes ([Figure 2](#ijms-26-02685-f002)).

The collinear gene pairs in the _B. napus_ genome were analyzed to explore syntenic relationships among _BnPERKs_ ([Figure 2](#ijms-26-02685-f002)). We identified 81 collinear gene pairs, including 49 pairs resulting from segmental duplication between the A and C subgenomes and 32 pairs occurring within a subgenome. The result indicated a high conservation between the A and C subgenomes. Additionally, we assessed the selective pressure exerted on duplicated _BnPERK_ genes by calculating the ratios of nonsynonymous to synonymous substitutions (Ka/Ks) for the paralogous gene pairs ([Supplementary Table S7](#app1-ijms-26-02685)). The Ka/Ks ratios ranged from 0.1409 to 0.2518 for 17 gene pairs in the A subgenome and from 0.1682 to 0.2519 for 15 gene pairs in the C subgenome. Furthermore, the Ka/Ks ratios for 49 gene pairs between the A and C subgenomes varied from 0.0482 to 0.5148. Notably, the Ka/Ks ratios for all paralogous gene pairs were found to be less than 1, indicating purifying selection acting on _BnPERK_ genes.

### 2.3. Gene Structure, Conserved Motifs, and Cis-Elements Analysis of BnPERK Genes

To elucidate the functional characteristics of _BnPERKs_, the conserved motif, protein domain, and exon–intron organization were analyzed together with the phylogenetic tree ([Figure 3](#ijms-26-02685-f003)). Ten conserved motifs were identified across the BnPERK proteins ([Figure 3](#ijms-26-02685-f003)A and [Supplementary Figure S2](#app1-ijms-26-02685)). These motifs exhibited consistent distribution patterns within the BnPERK proteins, with the exceptions of BnPERK15C2, BnPERK15A1, BnPERK15A3, and BnPERK10C1. Moreover, all _BnPERK_ genes shared conserved tyrosine kinase domains, highlighting their functional significance ([Figure 3](#ijms-26-02685-f003)B). Exon–intron analysis revealed structural diversity within the _BnPERK_ gene family, though orthologous genes generally shared similar gene structures ([Figure 3](#ijms-26-02685-f003)C). Most _BnPERK_ genes harbored 5–9 introns, with the number of introns ranging from 3 (_BnPERK15C2_) to 16 (_BnPERK15A2_).

_Cis_\-elements analysis is crucial for understanding gene regulation and function. Accordingly, upstream 2 kb sequences from _BnPERKs_ transcription start sites were analyzed ([Supplementary Tables S2 and S8](#app1-ijms-26-02685)). The results revealed that 75% of the identified _cis_\-elements were core promoter and enhancer region elements. The remaining _cis_\-elements were associated with hormonal responses, various stresses, and developmental processes ([Figure 4](#ijms-26-02685-f004)A and [Supplementary Figure S3](#app1-ijms-26-02685)). _Cis_\-elements regulated responses to diverse hormones, including methyl jasmona (MeJA), abscisic acid (ABA), gibberellin (GA), auxin, ethylene (ET), and salicylic acid (SA), which were calculated ([Figure 4](#ijms-26-02685-f004)B). The ABA and MeJA responsive elements were abundantly detected, and the auxin responsive elements were secondarily enriched ([Figure 4](#ijms-26-02685-f004)B). These _cis_\-elements relate to various biotic and abiotic stresses, such as light, anaerobic conditions, drought, low temperature, defense, and wounds ([Figure 4](#ijms-26-02685-f004)C). Notably, there were light-responsive elements in all of the _BnPERK_ genes ([Supplementary Figure S3](#app1-ijms-26-02685)). In addition, there was a small part of the _cis_\-elements that were categorized according to their roles in diverse developmental processes, including zein metabolism, endosperm expression, meristem expression, cell cycle regulation, and circadian control ([Figure 4](#ijms-26-02685-f004)D). The presence of such diverse _cis_\-elements suggests potential regulatory roles of _BnPERKs_ in diverse biological processes.

### 2.4. Expression Pattern of BnPERK Gene Family Across Various Tissues

The expression pattern of the _BnPERK_ genes was analyzed across 14 tissues at various developmental stages through RNA-Seq analysis ([Figure 5](#ijms-26-02685-f005)). The results exhibited diverse expression patterns across these tissues. There were 13 genes showing constitutive expression in multiple tissues, among which _BnPERK01A1_ and _BnPERK01C1_ exhibited the highest expression levels. In contrast, certain genes displayed specific expression patterns. For example, _BnPERK03A1_ showed highly specific but relatively low expression in the sepal, and _BnPERK15A3_ specifically expressed in the leaf and silique. Moreover, 18 orthologous genes of _AtPERK5_, _AtPERK6_, _AtPERK7_, and _AtPERK12_ in _B. napus_ were highly expressed in pollen. _BnPERK15C2_, which encoded the shortest protein, was not expressed in any tissues, suggesting a potential loss of function. These differential expression patterns of _BnPERK_ genes point to their diverse roles in plant growth and development.

Furthermore, some paralogous gene pairs, such as _BnPERK01A1_/_BnPERK01C1_ and _BnPERK09A1_/_BnPERK09C1_, showed similar expression patterns, being constitutively and highly expressed across all tested tissues. In contrast, other paralogous gene pairs, like _BnPERK06A1_/_BnPERK06A2_ and _BnPERK06C1_/_BnPERK06C2_, showed specific high expression in floral organs. Additionally, _BnPERK15A4_/_BnPERK15C3_ showed high expression levels in different tissues, except for pollen. However, some paralogous gene pairs exhibited distinct patterns, indicating functional divergence.

### 2.5. Expression Pattern of BnPERK Gene Family in Response to Hormone Treatments

In order to further explore the function of _BnPERK_s during hormone responses, we investigated their expression patterns in both leaves and roots after different hormone treatments ([Figure 6](#ijms-26-02685-f006)). Among the 50 identified _BnPERK_ genes, only a small subset was expressed in leaves and roots. Most of these expressed genes were strongly induced in leaves within 0.5 h after indole acetic acid (IAA), l-aminocyclopropane-l-carboxylic acid (ACC), gibberellin acid (GA), trans-zeatin (TZ), or brassinolide (BL) treatments ([Figure 6](#ijms-26-02685-f006)A). Additionally, four genes—_BnPERK15A4_, _BnPERK15C3_, _BnPERK08A1_, and _BnPERK08C1_—showed enhanced transcript levels at different time points after methyl jasmonate (MeJA) treatment in leaves. In contrast, their expression patterns in roots were distinct. Most genes showed enhanced expression levels after GA and ABA treatments but decreased expression levels after MeJA treatment ([Figure 6](#ijms-26-02685-f006)B). Notably, _BnPERK15A1_ was strongly induced after MeJA treatment. Furthermore, three genes, _BnPERK09A1_, _BnPERK09C1_, and _BnPERK04C1_, which showed increased expression in leaves after IAA treatment, were also induced in roots.

### 2.6. Protein–Protein Interaction Network Analysis of BnPERK Genes

Predictive interaction networks were employed to explore the biological mechanisms of BnPERK proteins. The analysis revealed that the BnPERK proteins putatively interact with 1133 proteins in _B. napus_. The results showed that most PERK proteins serve as core nodes in these networks, interacting with various proteins participating in different biological processes ([Figure 7](#ijms-26-02685-f007)A and [Supplementary Table S9](#app1-ijms-26-02685)).

KEGG enrichment analysis indicated that the interacting proteins were primarily involved in processes such as pentose and glucuronate interconversions, plant–pathogen interaction, starch and sucrose metabolism, cyanoamino acid metabolism, the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites, endoplasmic reticulum processing, and the MAPK signaling pathway ([Figure 7](#ijms-26-02685-f007)B and [Supplementary Table S10](#app1-ijms-26-02685)). Similarly, GO enrichment analysis revealed significant enrichment of terms like integral components of the membrane and plasma membrane in the cellular component category ([Figure 7](#ijms-26-02685-f007)C and [Supplementary Table S11](#app1-ijms-26-02685)). ATP binding and kinase activity were prominently enriched in the molecular function category. Biological process category terms such as protein phosphorylation, pectin catalytic activity, and cell wall modification were enriched. Protein interactions analysis provided a comprehensive view of the BnPERK proteins interaction network in _B. napus_, underscoring their central role and broad involvement in different biological processes, including sugar metabolism and plant–pathogen interaction.

### 2.7. Root Gall Formation and BnPERK Gene Expression in B. napus upon Plasmodiophora brassicae Inoculation

Galls were observed on the roots of _B. napus_ at 28 days after inoculation with _P. brassicae_ ([Figure 8](#ijms-26-02685-f008)A). Cross-sections of the inoculated roots revealed the changes in the vascular system. Resting spores that stained blue formed in the diseased roots. Furthermore, diseased root cells exhibited hypertrophy and disorder, accompanied by thickened cell walls, while control roots grew normally ([Figure 8](#ijms-26-02685-f008)B). To better understand the response of _BnPERK_ genes to clubroot disease, we analyzed the expression of _BnPERK_ at 14 days after _P. brassicae_ inoculation by RNA-Seq ([Figure 8](#ijms-26-02685-f008)C). Among the 50 identified _BnPERK_ genes, 23 were expressed in either inoculated or control roots. Notably, four genes, namely _BnPERK09A1_, _BnPERK09C1_, _BnPERK14A1_, and _BnPERK06C2,_ showed downregulated expression in response to _P. brassicae_, among which _BnPERK06C2_ was completely inhibited after inoculation. Additionally, the paralogous gene pair _BnPERK09A1_/_BnPERK09C1_ also exhibited consistent expression patterns across different tissues. These four downregulated _BnPERK_ genes were implicated in the response to _P. brassicae_.

### 2.8. Function of AtPERK9 in Clubroot Disease

To explore the putative role of _BnPERK09A1_ and _BnPERK09C1_ in clubroot disease, the mutant of the orthologous gene _AtPERK9_ (At1g68690) was used for clubroot disease investigation. Both the Col-0 and _perk9_ showed disease symptoms on the main roots and the lateral roots ([Figure 9](#ijms-26-02685-f009)A). The percentage of severely diseased plants (disease grade 3) in Col-0 was much higher than that in _perk9_, which resulted in a significantly higher disease index in Col-0 ([Figure 9](#ijms-26-02685-f009)B,C). It indicated that _perk9_ showed decreased severity of the clubroot disease.

Furthermore, the expression levels of _PERK9_, _PR2_, _PR5,_ and _RBOHD_ were evaluated in Col-0 and _perk9_ lines at 14 days after _P. brassicae_ inoculation. _PERK9_ also showed downregulated expression in response to _P. brassicae_ in Col-0, while it was totally inhibited in _perk9_. The expressions of _PR2_, _PR5_, and _RBOHD_ genes were greatly enhanced in _perk9_. _PR2_ and _RBOHD_ not only could be induced in Col-0 after _P. brassicae_ inoculation, but also in _perk9_. Enhanced disease resistance to clubroot disease and increased expression of these genes in _perk9_ indicated that the basal immune response was triggered by the knockout of _PERK9._

## 3\. Discussion

PERKs constitute a crucial subfamily of RLKs that play important roles in various molecular and cellular processes in plants, including development, signaling, and stress responses \[[5](#B5-ijms-26-02685)\]. Despite their significance, there remains a lack of comprehensive study on the molecular functions of PERKs, particularly when compared with other RLKs. While genome-wide analyses of _PERK_ genes have been conducted in some species \[[11](#B11-ijms-26-02685),[12](#B12-ijms-26-02685),[13](#B13-ijms-26-02685),[16](#B16-ijms-26-02685),[19](#B19-ijms-26-02685)\], a thorough study of the _BnPERK_ gene family has yet to be published. Therefore, this study systematically analyzed _BnPERK_ genes, covering various aspects.

### 3.1. Deciphering the Evolutionary Dynamics of the BnPERK Genes

There were 50 _PERK_ genes identified in the rapeseed cultivar ‘ZS11’ genome, highlighting an increased number of _BnPERK_ genes compared with previous studies ([Supplementary Table S3](#app1-ijms-26-02685)). This expansion of _BnPERK_ genes was attributed to the evolutionary path of the _Brassica_ genus, which experienced a genome triplication following its divergence from the _Arabidopsis_ lineage \[[17](#B17-ijms-26-02685),[18](#B18-ijms-26-02685)\]. Through interspecific hybridization between _B. rapa_ (AA) and _B. oleracea_ (CC), the allotetraploid _B. napus_ (AACC) arose. This complex evolutionary process contributed to the expansion of the _BnPERK_ gene family. Studies have consistently demonstrated that whole-genome duplication and segmental duplications are crucial mechanisms driving gene duplication and the expansion of gene families \[[20](#B20-ijms-26-02685),[21](#B21-ijms-26-02685),[22](#B22-ijms-26-02685)\]. The prevalence of paralogous gene pairs resulting from segmental duplication highlights the role of genome duplication events in this expansion.

Initially, it was expected that each _Arabidopsis_ gene would have six homologs in _B. napus_ due to two recent duplication events. However, only 50 _BnPERK_ genes were identified, suggesting a loss of duplicated _BnPERK_ genes following _Brassica_ genome triplication and hybridization. This indicated that gene loss was a crucial process during genomic arrangements and chromosome doubling \[[23](#B23-ijms-26-02685)\]. This also implied a selective process, where functionally redundant _BnPERK_ copies may have been lost, while the retained 50 _BnPERK_ genes may be crucial for plant development, hormone signaling, and stress response.

Phylogenetic analysis revealed that most _AtPERK_ genes corresponded to 2–6 orthologous genes in _B. napus_, each of which included orthologs from both the A and C subgenomes. However, some _AtPERK_ genes showed variations in the number of corresponding orthologous genes from the A and C subgenomes, suggesting extensive chromosomal rearrangements and asymmetric gene loss within duplicated genomic blocks \[[17](#B17-ijms-26-02685)\]. Analysis of Ka/Ks ratios of paralogous gene pairs indicated purifying selection on duplicated _BnPERK_ genes, implying their functional conservation and evolutionary constraint at these loci \[[24](#B24-ijms-26-02685)\].

Understanding the evolutionary dynamics of the _BnPERK_ gene family not only enriches our knowledge of rapeseed genetics but also has broader implications for research in plant biology and stress-response mechanisms.

### 3.2. Exploring the Structural Diversity and Functional Roles of BnPERKs

The _BnPERK_ gene family exhibited significant structural diversity, including variations in gene length, molecular weight, and isoelectric points. These variations suggested potential functional specialization within the gene family \[[25](#B25-ijms-26-02685)\].

Although functional studies of _BnPERKs_ are limited, expression profiling can still provide valuable insights about the gene’s function and its role in different biological processes \[[26](#B26-ijms-26-02685)\]. In accordance with the result in _A. thaliana_, _BnPERK_ family members exhibited two distinct expression patterns: some were highly expressed in pollen, while others had broader expression patterns \[[11](#B11-ijms-26-02685)\]. Constitutive expression of certain _BnPERK_ genes indicated their essential roles in fundamental cellular functions, while some _BnPERKs_ exhibited higher expression levels in floral organs, which is consistent with findings in other species like _A. thaliana_, _B. rapa_, _Triticum aestivum_, and _Oryza sativa_ and indicates their importance in floral development \[[11](#B11-ijms-26-02685),[12](#B12-ijms-26-02685),[16](#B16-ijms-26-02685),[19](#B19-ijms-26-02685)\]. Specifically, 18 orthologs of _AtPERK5_, _AtPERK6_, _AtPERK7,_ and _AtPERK12_ were notably expressed in pollen, among which _AtPERK5_ and _AtPERK12_ were shown to be essential for pollen tube growth \[[11](#B11-ijms-26-02685),[27](#B27-ijms-26-02685)\]. Furthermore, certain _B. rapa_ genes (orthologs of _AtPERK6_ and _AtPERK12_) were associated with male sterility, as they were downregulated in male-sterile mutants \[[19](#B19-ijms-26-02685)\]. _BnPERK01A1_ and _BnPERK01C1_ (orthologs of _AtPERK1_) showed constitutively high expression, suggesting essential roles in fundamental cellular functions. Functional analysis of _BnPERK1_ indicated its role in regulating cell wall integrity, signaling in stress responses, and facilitating growth and development in _Arabidopsis_ \[[15](#B15-ijms-26-02685)\].

Phylogenetic analysis indicated that the _BnPERK_ genes originated through segmental duplication \[[28](#B28-ijms-26-02685)\]. Structural examination confirmed the phylogenetic arrangement, with most _BnPERK_ genes sharing conserved motifs and tyrosine kinase domains. Differences in gene structure and _cis_\-acting regulatory elements in promoters suggested evolutionary divergence, which may contribute to functional diversity and evolutionary mechanisms \[[29](#B29-ijms-26-02685)\]. Analysis of the _cis_\-element indicated that _BnPERK_ genes were responsive to various stresses and hormone signaling pathways, with MeJA- and ABA-responsive elements being particularly abundant. This suggests that _BnPERK_ genes could mediate diverse gene expression patterns and provide flexibility in stress responses \[[30](#B30-ijms-26-02685)\].

Further study on the expression patterns of _BnPERK_ genes in response to hormone treatments provided insights into their potential roles in hormone signaling and plant development. This rapid and robust response to IAA, ET, GA, CK, and BL suggested that _BnPERK_ genes might play a crucial role in the early stages of hormonal signal transduction in leaves, possibly by mediating the downstream effects of these hormones. In contrast, the expression profiles in roots exhibited totally different expression patterns, which highlights the complexity and specificity of hormonal regulation in different tissues. Enhanced expression levels after GA and ABA treatments in roots suggest involvements in root growth and stress adaptation \[[31](#B31-ijms-26-02685),[32](#B32-ijms-26-02685)\]. The contrasting expression patterns after MeJA treatment in roots and leaves imply distinct roles in different tissues. Additionally, the observation that genes such as _BnPERK09A1_, _BnPERK09C1_, and _BnPERK04C1_ were induced in both leaves and roots after IAA treatment implies a role in auxin signaling, which is central to various developmental processes, including cell elongation and differentiation \[[33](#B33-ijms-26-02685)\]. These genes may act as intermediaries in auxin signal transduction pathways, influencing growth and development in a tissue-specific manner.

In summary, the comprehensive examination illuminates the structural diversity and functional implications of the _BnPERK_ gene family. The differential expression patterns of _BnPERK_ genes in response to various hormone treatments highlight their potential involvement in diverse physiological processes, including growth regulation, stress responses, and defense mechanisms.

### 3.3. Revealing the Role of BnPERK in Clubroot Disease

Recent studies have suggested that receptor-like kinases (RLKs) including PERKs are involved in plant–pathogen interactions and immune responses \[[2](#B2-ijms-26-02685),[3](#B3-ijms-26-02685),[4](#B4-ijms-26-02685)\]. Analysis of _cis_\-elements and expression profiles suggested that _BnPERKs_ may act as novel sensors for various stresses, particularly plant pathogen infections \[[5](#B5-ijms-26-02685),[12](#B12-ijms-26-02685)\]. Protein–protein interaction network analysis supported this result, revealing the multifunctionality of BnPERK proteins and emphasizing their broad participation in plant physiological processes specific to plant disease response \[[34](#B34-ijms-26-02685)\]. The interactions involved cell wall organization, plant–pathogen interactions, plasma membrane dynamics, endomembrane activities, MAPK signaling pathways, and starch/sucrose metabolism. Given that pathogen-induced changes in cell walls affected disease resistance, it is possible that _BnPERKs_ detect these alterations and initiate responses to maintain cell wall integrity \[[35](#B35-ijms-26-02685)\]. The membrane localization of _BnPERKs_ suggested they might perceive infection signals at the cell’s surface. Upon activation by cell wall components, _BnPERKs_ likely trigger downstream signaling cascades, including MAPK pathways \[[36](#B36-ijms-26-02685)\]. Otherwise, MAPK pathways also acted as downstream signaling components of hormones and played important roles in plant responses to different stresses \[[37](#B37-ijms-26-02685)\]. Despite these insights, the exact role of _BnPERKs_ in plant immunity remains largely unknown, and their interactions with RLKs or coreceptors remain largely unexplored.

Clubroot disease, caused by the obligate parasite _P. brassicae_, poses a significant threat to Brassicaceae plants \[[38](#B38-ijms-26-02685)\]. The parasite is dependent on plant-derived sugars as a carbon source for colonization \[[39](#B39-ijms-26-02685),[40](#B40-ijms-26-02685)\]. The enriched sugar metabolism reflects the altered homeostasis and increased demand for sugar in infected plants. However, the downstream signaling components and their regulation in response to _P. brassicae_ infection are not yet clear. The _PERK_ gene family, with its known functions in cell wall integrity and stress responses, may contribute to reinforcing the plant cell wall during pathogen infection or modulating defense-related signaling pathways \[[5](#B5-ijms-26-02685)\]. Given the role of _PERKs_ in disease response, the involvement of the _PERK_ gene family in _B. napus_ in clubroot disease was as expected. The transcriptional downregulation of _BnPERK09A1_, _BnPERK09C1_, _BnPERK14A1_, and _BnPERK06C2_ upon _P. brassicae_ infection suggests their putative roles in clubroot disease response. In accordance with the result in _B. napus_, the expression of _AtPERK9_ was also downregulated in response to _P. brassicae_. The _perk9_ mutant was used for clubroot disease investigation, indicating the roles of _BnPERK09A1_ and _BnPERK09C1_ in the disease resistance. Pathogenesis-related proteins including enzymes like β-1,3-glucanase (PR2) and thionins (PR5), which have antimicrobial activity and are involved in the basal immune response \[[41](#B41-ijms-26-02685)\]. The _RBOHD_ (Respiratory burst oxidase homolog D) gene is crucial in generating reactive oxygen species (ROS) as part of the plant immune system \[[42](#B42-ijms-26-02685)\]. The increased expression of these genes suggested that the knockout of _AtPERK9_ triggered the basal immune response, resulting in increased disease resistance in _perk9._ The induction of _PR2_ and _RBOHD_ in both Col-0 and _perk9_ after inoculation suggested that basal immune response occurred in susceptible Col-0. Furthermore, the induction of _BnPERK09A1_ and _BnPERK09C1_ by IAA treatment was also particularly intriguing, as IAA is known to act as a signaling molecule potentially involved in the response to _P. brassicae_ infection \[[43](#B43-ijms-26-02685),[44](#B44-ijms-26-02685),[45](#B45-ijms-26-02685)\]. However, the exact roles of _BnPERK09A1_ and _BnPERK09C1_ need further function study. The predicted interaction proteins associated with these pathways implied their roles in mediating the interaction between _B. napus_ and _P. brassicae_, providing targets for further functional characterization.

In summary, uncovering the role of _BnPERKs_ in clubroot disease response provided valuable insights into plant–pathogen interactions and potential strategies for disease management.

## 4\. Materials and Methods

### 4.1. Identification of BnPERK Genes in Brassica napus

The _BnPERK_ gene family was selected in this study due to its critical role in plant growth, development, and stress responses. It has not been extensively studied in _B. napus_, making it a valuable target for genome-wide analysis. The genomic data and annotation for the _B. napus_ cultivar ‘ZS11’ were sourced from _B. napus_ multi-omics information resource (BnIR) ([https://yanglab.hzau.edu.cn/BnIR](https://yanglab.hzau.edu.cn/BnIR), accessed on 1 March 2024) \[[46](#B46-ijms-26-02685)\]. The _PERK_ genes in _B. napus_ were identified using BLASTp ([https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/](https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/)) with an E-value threshold of 10−5, employing the protein sequence of 15 AtPERKs as queries \[[11](#B11-ijms-26-02685)\]. The _BnPERK_ gene family members were named based on their orthologous relationships and chromosomal location. By searching the conserved domain in InterPro ([http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro), accessed on 5 March 2024) and the NCBI Conserved Domain Database ([https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Structure/cdd/wrpsb.cgi](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Structure/cdd/wrpsb.cgi), accessed on 5 March 2024), the tyrosine kinase domain-containing protein sequences were verified for candidate _BnPERK_ genes. Additionally, Expasy ([https://web.expasy.org/protparam](https://web.expasy.org/protparam), accessed on 8 March 2024) was utilized to assess the isoelectric points (pIs) and the molecular weights (MWs) of BnPERK proteins. Subcellular locations of these proteins were predicted using Euk-mPLoc \[[47](#B47-ijms-26-02685)\] ([http://www.csbio.sjtu.edu.cn/bioinf/euk-multi-2](http://www.csbio.sjtu.edu.cn/bioinf/euk-multi-2), accessed on8 March 2024).

### 4.2. Chromosomal Location, Gene Duplication, and Phylogenetic Analysis

The positions of the _BnPERK_ genes on the chromosomes were obtained from the annotation of the _B. napus_ genome. McScanX ([https://www.rcac.purdue.edu/software/mcscanx](https://www.rcac.purdue.edu/software/mcscanx)) was employed to detect the duplication patterns, including segmental and tandem duplication \[[48](#B48-ijms-26-02685)\]. Visualization of chromosomal distribution and duplication events was represented using Circos (Vers. 0.69-9) software \[[49](#B49-ijms-26-02685)\]. The Ka/Ks (nonsynonymous substitution rate to synonymous substitution rate) ratio was calculated for the paralogous gene pairs using ParaAT2.0 \[[50](#B50-ijms-26-02685)\]. Collinearity analysis of _BnPERK_ genes was conducted and displayed using TBtools (Vers. 2.056) \[[51](#B51-ijms-26-02685)\]. A phylogenetic tree was generated using MEGA 11 \[[52](#B52-ijms-26-02685)\] through neighbor-joining method with 1000 bootstrap replications and visualized using iTol ([https://itol.embl.de](https://itol.embl.de/), accessed on 11 March 2024).

### 4.3. Gene Structure, Conserved Motifs, and Cis-Elements Analysis

The exon–intron structure of _PERK_ genes was examined using Gene Structure Display Server 2.0 ([https://gsds.gao-lab.org/index.php/](https://gsds.gao-lab.org/index.php/) accessed on 14 March 2024). Conserved motifs were predicted using Multiple Expectation Maximization for Motif Elicitation ([https://meme-suite.org/meme/tools/meme](https://meme-suite.org/meme/tools/meme), accessed on 14 March 2024). The sequences of 2 Kb upstream from the start codon of 50 _BnPERK_ genes were extracted from the _B. napus_ ‘ZS11’ genome and analyzed for _cis_\-elements using PlantCARE \[[53](#B53-ijms-26-02685)\] ([http://bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/webtools/plantcare/html](http://bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/webtools/plantcare/html), accessed on 14 March 2024) to predict _cis_\-elements. The data were visualized using TBtools (Vers. 2.056) \[[51](#B51-ijms-26-02685)\].

### 4.4. Expression Profiles of BnPERK Genes in Different Tissues and Under Hormone Treatments

To display different expression profiles, RNA-Seq data from various tissues and the hormone response of _B. napus_ cultivar ‘ZS11’ were obtained from BnIR. A total of 14 tissues at different development stages included seed, leaf, bud, root, petal, sepal, pollen, silique, filament, cotyledon, lower stem peel, middle stem peel, upper stem peel, and vegetative rosette stages. The roots and leaves were treated with hormones (IAA, auxin; ACC, l-aminocyclopropane-l-carboxylic acid; GA, gibberellin acid; ABA, abscisic acid; TZ, trans-zeatin; JA, methyl jasmonate; BL, brassinolide) and sampled at 0.5, 1, 3, and 6 h after treatment. Heatmaps were generated using these expression values after logarithmic transformed RPKM values and displayed using TBtools (Vers. 2.056) \[[51](#B51-ijms-26-02685)\].

### 4.5. Network-Based Prediction of Protein Interactions

Analysis of the protein–protein interaction network in _B. napus_ was predicted using STRING ([https://cn.string-db.org/](https://cn.string-db.org/), accessed on 15 March 2024), and the interactions were displayed using Cytoscape (Vers. 3.9.1) \[[54](#B54-ijms-26-02685)\]. In order to investigate the biological process involving _B. napus_ genes, the putative interacted genes based on Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analyses were conducted by BnaOmics \[[55](#B55-ijms-26-02685)\] ([https://bnaomics.ocri-genomics.net/tools/enrich/](https://bnaomics.ocri-genomics.net/tools/enrich/), accessed on 15 March 2024).

### 4.6. Plasmodiophora Brassicae Inoculation, Clubroot Disease Investigation, and Histocytological Analysis

A collection of _Plasmodiophora brassicae_ isolate from Zhijiang, Hubei, was used for inoculation in greenhouse. The seeds of _B. napus_ cultivar ‘ZS11’, wild-type _A. thaliana_ (Col-0), and _AtPERK9_ mutant were germinated in a greenhouse maintained at 24 °C under a 16/8 h light/dark photoperiod. Seven-day-old rapeseed seedlings were inoculated with resting spores of _P. brassicae_ at a concentration of 10−6 spores/mL \[[56](#B56-ijms-26-02685)\]. Two-week-old _Arabidopsis_ seedlings were inoculated at a concentration of 10−5 spores/mL. The clubroot disease was investigated and photographed at 28–35 days after inoculation. The disease index was assessed using the following 0–3 scoring system: 0 refers to healthy roots; 1 refers to small galls on lateral roots only; 2 refers to small and medium galls covering the main root and a few lateral roots; 3 indicates large galls on the main root. The disease index (DI) was calculated according to the following formula: DI = 100 × (1 × N1 + 2 × N2 + 3 × N3)/3 × Nt. N1 to N3 refer to the number of plants in the indicated class, and Nt is the total number of plants tested.

The progression of cortex infection by _P. brassicae_ was studied. Approximately 0.5 cm long root segments were excised from the upper of the primary root. Following standard protocols for fixation and dehydration, the samples were embedded in paraffin and sectioned at a thickness of 5–8 μM. Sections were analyzed and photographed using an optical microscope.

### 4.7. Transcriptome Analysis of BnPERK Genes in B. napus During Clubroot Disease

Root samples of _B. napus_ infected with _P. brassicae_ and uninfected controls were harvested at 14 days after treatment for RNA-Seq analysis. After sequencing and quality control, bioinformatics pipelines were using to clean raw sequencing data by removing adapters and low-quality reads. Then, the clean reads were aligned to the genome of ‘ZS11’. Gene expression levels were estimated using logarithmic transformed FPKM values. The differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between infected and control samples were determined with the DEGseq2 (adjusted _p_ < 0.05 and |log2(fold-change)| ≥ 1) and displayed using TBtools (Vers. 2.056).

### 4.8. qRT-PCR Analysis of Pathogenesis-Related (PR) Genes in A. thaliana

Root samples from _Arabidopsis_ Col-0 and _perk9_ infected with _P. brassicae_ and uninfected controls were harvested at 14 days after inoculation for qRT-PCR study. Total RNA was extracted from control and inoculated roots using the FastPure Universal Plant Total RNA Isolation Kit (Vazyme, Nanjing, China). First-strand cDNA was synthesized with HiScript IV RT SuperMix for qPCR (Vazyme). Gene-specific primers are listed in [Supplementary Table S1](#app1-ijms-26-02685). _Actin2_ was used as reference gene. After running the qRT-PCR reactions, Ct (cycle threshold) values were obtained for each sample. The relative expression level was determined using the 2−ΔΔCt method \[[57](#B57-ijms-26-02685)\]. The data were presented as the mean ± standard error (SE) based on three technical replicates of three biological replicates. Significant difference was determined at a _p_\-value < 0.05.

## 5\. Conclusions

The study emphasized the evolutionary dynamics, structural diversity, and functional roles of the _BnPERK_ gene family. It suggested that _BnPERK_ genes are involved in various physiological processes, including growth regulation, stress responses, and the defense against pathogens. The transcriptional downregulation of _BnPERK09A1_ and _BnPERK09C1_ upon _P. brassicae_ infection and the potential involvement of these genes in clubroot disease response further emphasize their significance in plant immunity. The identification of _BnPERK09A1_ and _BnPERK09C1_ as potential targets for disease management strategies and their putative role in signaling networks could contribute to the resistance improvement of Brassicaceae crops.

## Supplementary Materials

The following supporting information can be downloaded at: [https://www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/ijms26062685/s1](https://www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/ijms26062685/s1).

## Author Contributions

Validation, L.R.; Investigation, Z.Z., T.F. and C.Z.; Resources, L.Z.; Data curation, Z.Z.; Writing–original draft, Z.Z. and L.X.; Writing–review & editing, L.X.; Visualization, Z.Z. and T.F.; Supervision, C.T. and L.L.; Project administration, F.L.; Funding acquisition, C.T. and L.X. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

## Institutional Review Board Statement

Not applicable.

## Informed Consent Statement

Not applicable.

## Data Availability Statement

Data are contained within the article and [Supplementary Materials](#app1-ijms-26-02685).

## Conflicts of Interest

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Funding Statement

This research was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2023YFF1000700), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (32370693), and the Innovation Program of Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (CAAS-CSIAF-202402).

## Footnotes

**Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note:** The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

## References

*   1.Morris E.R., Walker J.C. Receptor-like protein kinases: The keys to response. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 2003;6:339–342. doi: 10.1016/S1369-5266(03)00055-4. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1369-5266\(03\)00055-4)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12873528/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr.%20Opin.%20Plant%20Biol.&title=Receptor-like%20protein%20kinases:%20The%20keys%20to%20response&author=E.R.%20Morris&author=J.C.%20Walker&volume=6&publication_year=2003&pages=339-342&pmid=12873528&doi=10.1016/S1369-5266\(03\)00055-4&)\]
*   2.Cui Y.W., Lu X.T., Gou X.P. Receptor-like protein kinases in plant reproduction: Current understanding and future perspectives. Plant Commun. 2022;3:100273. doi: 10.1016/j.xplc.2021.100273. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xplc.2021.100273)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8760141/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35059634/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Commun.&title=Receptor-like%20protein%20kinases%20in%20plant%20reproduction:%20Current%20understanding%20and%20future%20perspectives&author=Y.W.%20Cui&author=X.T.%20Lu&author=X.P.%20Gou&volume=3&publication_year=2022&pages=100273&pmid=35059634&doi=10.1016/j.xplc.2021.100273&)\]
*   3.Wu Y., Zhou J.M. Receptor-like kinases in plant innate immunity. J. Integr. Plant Biol. 2013;55:1271–1286. doi: 10.1111/jipb.12123. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/jipb.12123)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24308571/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Integr.%20Plant%20Biol.&title=Receptor-like%20kinases%20in%20plant%20innate%20immunity&author=Y.%20Wu&author=J.M.%20Zhou&volume=55&publication_year=2013&pages=1271-1286&pmid=24308571&doi=10.1111/jipb.12123&)\]
*   4.Dievart A., Gottin C., Périn C., Ranwez V., Chantret N. Origin and Diversity of Plant Receptor-Like Kinases. Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 2020;71:131–156. doi: 10.1146/annurev-arplant-073019-025927. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-arplant-073019-025927)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32186895/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Annu.%20Rev.%20Plant%20Biol.&title=Origin%20and%20Diversity%20of%20Plant%20Receptor-Like%20Kinases&author=A.%20Dievart&author=C.%20Gottin&author=C.%20P%C3%A9rin&author=V.%20Ranwez&author=N.%20Chantret&volume=71&publication_year=2020&pages=131-156&pmid=32186895&doi=10.1146/annurev-arplant-073019-025927&)\]
*   5.Invernizzi M., Hanemian M., Keller J., Libourel C., Roby D. PERKing up our understanding of the proline-rich extensin-like receptor kinases, a forgotten plant receptor kinase family. New Phytol. 2022;235:875–884. doi: 10.1111/nph.18166. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.18166)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35451507/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=New%20Phytol.&title=PERKing%20up%20our%20understanding%20of%20the%20proline-rich%20extensin-like%20receptor%20kinases,%20a%20forgotten%20plant%20receptor%20kinase%20family&author=M.%20Invernizzi&author=M.%20Hanemian&author=J.%20Keller&author=C.%20Libourel&author=D.%20Roby&volume=235&publication_year=2022&pages=875-884&pmid=35451507&doi=10.1111/nph.18166&)\]
*   6.Bai L., Zhou Y., Song C.P. Arabidopsis proline-rich extensin-like receptor kinase 4 modulates the early event toward abscisic acid response in root tip growth. Plant Signal. Behav. 2009;4:1075–1077. doi: 10.4161/psb.4.11.9739. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.4161/psb.4.11.9739)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2819518/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20009554/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Signal.%20Behav.&title=Arabidopsis%20proline-rich%20extensin-like%20receptor%20kinase%204%20modulates%20the%20early%20event%20toward%20abscisic%20acid%20response%20in%20root%20tip%20growth&author=L.%20Bai&author=Y.%20Zhou&author=C.P.%20Song&volume=4&publication_year=2009&pages=1075-1077&pmid=20009554&doi=10.4161/psb.4.11.9739&)\]
*   7.Silva N.F., Goring D.R. The proline-rich, extensin-like receptor kinase-1 (PERK1) gene is rapidly induced by wounding. Plant Mol. Biol. 2002;50:667–685. doi: 10.1023/A:1019951120788. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1019951120788)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12374299/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Mol.%20Biol.&title=The%20proline-rich,%20extensin-like%20receptor%20kinase-1%20\(PERK1\)%20gene%20is%20rapidly%20induced%20by%20wounding&author=N.F.%20Silva&author=D.R.%20Goring&volume=50&publication_year=2002&pages=667-685&pmid=12374299&doi=10.1023/A:1019951120788&)\]
*   8.Uemura T., Hachisu M., Desaki Y., Ito A., Hoshino R., Sano Y., Nozawa A., Mujiono K., Galis I., Yoshida A., et al. Soy and Arabidopsis receptor-like kinases respond to polysaccharide signals from Spodoptera species and mediate herbivore resistance. Commun. Biol. 2020;3:224. doi: 10.1038/s42003-020-0959-4. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-020-0959-4)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7210110/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32385340/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Commun.%20Biol.&title=Soy%20and%20Arabidopsis%20receptor-like%20kinases%20respond%20to%20polysaccharide%20signals%20from%20Spodoptera%20species%20and%20mediate%20herbivore%20resistance&author=T.%20Uemura&author=M.%20Hachisu&author=Y.%20Desaki&author=A.%20Ito&author=R.%20Hoshino&volume=3&publication_year=2020&pages=224&pmid=32385340&doi=10.1038/s42003-020-0959-4&)\]
*   9.Xue C.W., Li W.F., Shen R.F., Lan P. PERK13 modulates phosphate deficiencyinduced root hair elongation in Arabidopsis. Plant Sci. 2021;312:111060. doi: 10.1016/j.plantsci.2021.111060. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plantsci.2021.111060)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34620427/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Sci.&title=PERK13%20modulates%20phosphate%20deficiencyinduced%20root%20hair%20elongation%20in%20Arabidopsis&author=C.W.%20Xue&author=W.F.%20Li&author=R.F.%20Shen&author=P.%20Lan&volume=312&publication_year=2021&pages=111060&pmid=34620427&doi=10.1016/j.plantsci.2021.111060&)\]
*   10.Bai L., Zhang G.Z., Zhou Y., Zhang Z.P., Wang W., Du Y.Y., Wu Z.Y., Song C.P. Plasma membrane-associated proline-rich extensin-like receptor kinase 4, a novel regulator of Ca signalling, is required for abscisic acid responses in. Plant J. 2009;60:314–327. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.03956.x. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.03956.x)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19566594/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20J.&title=Plasma%20membrane-associated%20proline-rich%20extensin-like%20receptor%20kinase%204,%20a%20novel%20regulator%20of%20Ca%20signalling,%20is%20required%20for%20abscisic%20acid%20responses%20in&author=L.%20Bai&author=G.Z.%20Zhang&author=Y.%20Zhou&author=Z.P.%20Zhang&author=W.%20Wang&volume=60&publication_year=2009&pages=314-327&pmid=19566594&doi=10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.03956.x&)\]
*   11.Nakhamchik A., Zhao Z.Y., Provart N.J., Shiu S.H., Keatley S.K., Cameron R.K., Goring D.R. A comprehensive expression analysis of the Arabidopsis proline-rich extensin-like receptor kinase gene family using bioinformatic and experimental approaches. Plant Cell Physiol. 2004;45:1875–1881. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pch206. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/pcp/pch206)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15653807/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Cell%20Physiol.&title=A%20comprehensive%20expression%20analysis%20of%20the%20Arabidopsis%20proline-rich%20extensin-like%20receptor%20kinase%20gene%20family%20using%20bioinformatic%20and%20experimental%20approaches&author=A.%20Nakhamchik&author=Z.Y.%20Zhao&author=N.J.%20Provart&author=S.H.%20Shiu&author=S.K.%20Keatley&volume=45&publication_year=2004&pages=1875-1881&pmid=15653807&doi=10.1093/pcp/pch206&)\]
*   12.Kesawat M.S., Kherawat B.S., Singh A., Dey P., Routray S., Mohapatra C., Saha D., Ram C., Siddique K.H.M., Kumar A., et al. Genome-wide analysis and characterization of the proline-rich extensin-like receptor kinases (PERKs) gene family reveals their role in different developmental stages and stress conditions in wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) Plants. 2022;11:496. doi: 10.3390/plants11040496. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/plants11040496)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8880425/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35214830/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plants&title=Genome-wide%20analysis%20and%20characterization%20of%20the%20proline-rich%20extensin-like%20receptor%20kinases%20\(PERKs\)%20gene%20family%20reveals%20their%20role%20in%20different%20developmental%20stages%20and%20stress%20conditions%20in%20wheat%20\(Triticum%20aestivum%20L.\)&author=M.S.%20Kesawat&author=B.S.%20Kherawat&author=A.%20Singh&author=P.%20Dey&author=S.%20Routray&volume=11&publication_year=2022&pages=496&pmid=35214830&doi=10.3390/plants11040496&)\]
*   13.Qanmber G., Liu J., Yu D.Q., Liu Z., Lu L.L., Mo H.J., Ma S.Y., Wang Z., Yang Z.R. Genome-wide identification and characterization of the PERK gene family in Gossypium hirsutum reveals gene duplication and functional divergence. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019;20:1750. doi: 10.3390/ijms20071750. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms20071750)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6479967/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30970629/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.%20J.%20Mol.%20Sci.&title=Genome-wide%20identification%20and%20characterization%20of%20the%20PERK%20gene%20family%20in%20Gossypium%20hirsutum%20reveals%20gene%20duplication%20and%20functional%20divergence&author=G.%20Qanmber&author=J.%20Liu&author=D.Q.%20Yu&author=Z.%20Liu&author=L.L.%20Lu&volume=20&publication_year=2019&pages=1750&pmid=30970629&doi=10.3390/ijms20071750&)\]
*   14.Feng P., Shi J.Q., Zhang T., Zhong Y.Q., Zhang L.S., Yu G.L., Zhang T.Q., Zhu X.Y., Xing Y.D., Yin W.Z., et al. Zebra leaf 15, a receptor-like protein kinase involved in moderate low temperature signaling pathway in rice. Rice. 2019;12:83. doi: 10.1186/s12284-019-0339-1. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12284-019-0339-1)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6858429/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31732821/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Rice&title=Zebra%20leaf%2015,%20a%20receptor-like%20protein%20kinase%20involved%20in%20moderate%20low%20temperature%20signaling%20pathway%20in%20rice&author=P.%20Feng&author=J.Q.%20Shi&author=T.%20Zhang&author=Y.Q.%20Zhong&author=L.S.%20Zhang&volume=12&publication_year=2019&pages=83&pmid=31732821&doi=10.1186/s12284-019-0339-1&)\]
*   15.Haffani Y.Z., Silva-Gagliardi N.F., Sewter S.K., Aldea M.G., Zhao Z.Y., Nakhamchik A., Cameron R.K., Goring D.R. Altered expression of PERK receptor kinases in leads to changes in Arabidopsis growth and floral organ formation. Plant Signal. Behav. 2006;1:251–260. doi: 10.4161/psb.1.5.3324. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.4161/psb.1.5.3324)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2634126/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19516986/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Signal.%20Behav.&title=Altered%20expression%20of%20PERK%20receptor%20kinases%20in%20leads%20to%20changes%20in%20Arabidopsis%20growth%20and%20floral%20organ%20formation&author=Y.Z.%20Haffani&author=N.F.%20Silva-Gagliardi&author=S.K.%20Sewter&author=M.G.%20Aldea&author=Z.Y.%20Zhao&volume=1&publication_year=2006&pages=251-260&pmid=19516986&doi=10.4161/psb.1.5.3324&)\]
*   16.Kesawat M.S., Kherawat B.S., Katara J.L., Parameswaran C., Misra N., Kumar M., Chung S.M., Alamri S., Siddiqui M.H. Genome-wide analysis of proline-rich extensin-like receptor kinases (PERKs) gene family reveals their roles in plant development and stress conditions in Oryza sativa L. Plant Sci. 2023;334:111749. doi: 10.1016/j.plantsci.2023.111749. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plantsci.2023.111749)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37244501/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Sci.&title=Genome-wide%20analysis%20of%20proline-rich%20extensin-like%20receptor%20kinases%20\(PERKs\)%20gene%20family%20reveals%20their%20roles%20in%20plant%20development%20and%20stress%20conditions%20in%20Oryza%20sativa%20L.&author=M.S.%20Kesawat&author=B.S.%20Kherawat&author=J.L.%20Katara&author=C.%20Parameswaran&author=N.%20Misra&volume=334&publication_year=2023&pages=111749&pmid=37244501&doi=10.1016/j.plantsci.2023.111749&)\]
*   17.Chalhoub B., Denoeud F., Liu S.Y., Parkin I.A.P., Tang H.B., Wang X.Y., Chiquet J., Belcram H., Tong C.B., Samans B., et al. Early allopolyploid evolution in the post-Neolithic Brassica napus oilseed genome. Science. 2014;345:950–953. doi: 10.1126/science.1253435. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1253435)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25146293/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Science&title=Early%20allopolyploid%20evolution%20in%20the%20post-Neolithic%20Brassica%20napus%20oilseed%20genome&author=B.%20Chalhoub&author=F.%20Denoeud&author=S.Y.%20Liu&author=I.A.P.%20Parkin&author=H.B.%20Tang&volume=345&publication_year=2014&pages=950-953&pmid=25146293&doi=10.1126/science.1253435&)\]
*   18.Song X.M., Wei Y.P., Xiao D., Gong K., Sun P.C., Ren Y.M., Yuan J.Q., Wu T., Yang Q.H., Li X.Y., et al. Genome characterization clarifies U’s triangle model of evolution and polyploidy in Brassica. Plant Physiol. 2021;186:388–406. doi: 10.1093/plphys/kiab048. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/plphys/kiab048)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8154070/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33599732/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Physiol.&title=Genome%20characterization%20clarifies%20U%E2%80%99s%20triangle%20model%20of%20evolution%20and%20polyploidy%20in%20Brassica&author=X.M.%20Song&author=Y.P.%20Wei&author=D.%20Xiao&author=K.%20Gong&author=P.C.%20Sun&volume=186&publication_year=2021&pages=388-406&pmid=33599732&doi=10.1093/plphys/kiab048&)\]
*   19.Chen G.H., Wang J., Wang H., Wang C.G., Tang X.Y., Li J., Zhang L., Song J.H., Hou J.F., Yuan L.Y. Genome-wide analysis of proline-rich extension-like receptor protein kinase (PERK) in Brassica rapa and its association with the pollen development. BMC Genom. 2020;21:401. doi: 10.1186/s12864-020-06802-9. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12864-020-06802-9)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7296749/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32539701/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=BMC%20Genom.&title=Genome-wide%20analysis%20of%20proline-rich%20extension-like%20receptor%20protein%20kinase%20\(PERK\)%20in%20Brassica%20rapa%20and%20its%20association%20with%20the%20pollen%20development&author=G.H.%20Chen&author=J.%20Wang&author=H.%20Wang&author=C.G.%20Wang&author=X.Y.%20Tang&volume=21&publication_year=2020&pages=401&pmid=32539701&doi=10.1186/s12864-020-06802-9&)\]
*   20.Gu B.J., Tong Y.K., Wang Y.Y., Zhang M.L., Ma G.J., Wu X.Q., Zhang J.F., Xu F., Li J., Ren F. Genome-wide evolution and expression analysis of the MYB-CC gene family in Brassica spp. PeerJ. 2022;10:e12882. doi: 10.7717/peerj.12882. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.12882)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8884064/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35237467/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PeerJ&title=Genome-wide%20evolution%20and%20expression%20analysis%20of%20the%20MYB-CC%20gene%20family%20in%20Brassica%20spp.&author=B.J.%20Gu&author=Y.K.%20Tong&author=Y.Y.%20Wang&author=M.L.%20Zhang&author=G.J.%20Ma&volume=10&publication_year=2022&pages=e12882&pmid=35237467&doi=10.7717/peerj.12882&)\]
*   21.Roy B.C., Shukla N., Gachhui R., Mukherjee A. Genome-wide analysis of glutamate receptor gene family in allopolyploid Brassica napus and its diploid progenitors. Genetica. 2023;151:293–310. doi: 10.1007/s10709-023-00192-y. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10709-023-00192-y)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37624443/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genetica&title=Genome-wide%20analysis%20of%20glutamate%20receptor%20gene%20family%20in%20allopolyploid%20Brassica%20napus%20and%20its%20diploid%20progenitors&author=B.C.%20Roy&author=N.%20Shukla&author=R.%20Gachhui&author=A.%20Mukherjee&volume=151&publication_year=2023&pages=293-310&pmid=37624443&doi=10.1007/s10709-023-00192-y&)\]
*   22.Xie M.L., Zuo R., Bai Z.T., Yang L.L., Zhao C.J., Gao F., Cheng X.H., Huang J.Y., Liu Y.Y., Li Y., et al. Genome-wide characterization of serine/arginine-rich gene family and its genetic effects on agronomic traits of Brassica napus. Front. Plant Sci. 2022;13:829668. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2022.829668. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2022.829668)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8889041/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35251101/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Front.%20Plant%20Sci.&title=Genome-wide%20characterization%20of%20serine/arginine-rich%20gene%20family%20and%20its%20genetic%20effects%20on%20agronomic%20traits%20of%20Brassica%20napus&author=M.L.%20Xie&author=R.%20Zuo&author=Z.T.%20Bai&author=L.L.%20Yang&author=C.J.%20Zhao&volume=13&publication_year=2022&pages=829668&pmid=35251101&doi=10.3389/fpls.2022.829668&)\]
*   23.Albalat R., Cañestro C. Evolution by gene loss. Nat. Rev. Genet. 2016;17:379–391. doi: 10.1038/nrg.2016.39. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg.2016.39)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27087500/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat.%20Rev.%20Genet.&title=Evolution%20by%20gene%20loss&author=R.%20Albalat&author=C.%20Ca%C3%B1estro&volume=17&publication_year=2016&pages=379-391&pmid=27087500&doi=10.1038/nrg.2016.39&)\]
*   24.Liu J.F., Zhang Y., Lei X.Y., Zhang Z.M. Natural selection of protein structural and functional properties: A single nucleotide polymorphism perspective. Genome Biol. 2008;9:R69. doi: 10.1186/gb-2008-9-4-r69. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/gb-2008-9-4-r69)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2643940/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18397526/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genome%20Biol.&title=Natural%20selection%20of%20protein%20structural%20and%20functional%20properties:%20A%20single%20nucleotide%20polymorphism%20perspective&author=J.F.%20Liu&author=Y.%20Zhang&author=X.Y.%20Lei&author=Z.M.%20Zhang&volume=9&publication_year=2008&pages=R69&pmid=18397526&doi=10.1186/gb-2008-9-4-r69&)\]
*   25.Barberis E., Marengo E., Manfredi M. Protein subcellular localization prediction. Methods Mol. Biol. 2021;2361:197–212. doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1641-3\_12. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-0716-1641-3_12)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34236663/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Methods%20Mol.%20Biol.&title=Protein%20subcellular%20localization%20prediction&author=E.%20Barberis&author=E.%20Marengo&author=M.%20Manfredi&volume=2361&publication_year=2021&pages=197-212&pmid=34236663&doi=10.1007/978-1-0716-1641-3_12&)\]
*   26.Zhang C.X., Freddolino P.L., Zhang Y. COFACTOR: Improved protein function prediction by combining structure, sequence and protein-protein interaction information. Nucleic Acids Res. 2017;45:291–299. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx366. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkx366)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5793808/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28472402/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nucleic%20Acids%20Res.&title=COFACTOR:%20Improved%20protein%20function%20prediction%20by%20combining%20structure,%20sequence%20and%20protein-protein%20interaction%20information&author=C.X.%20Zhang&author=P.L.%20Freddolino&author=Y.%20Zhang&volume=45&publication_year=2017&pages=291-299&pmid=28472402&doi=10.1093/nar/gkx366&)\]
*   27.Borassi C., Sede A.R., Mecchia M.A., Mangano S., Marzol E., Denita-Juarez S.P., Salter J.D.S., Velasquez S.M., Muschietti J.P., Estevez J.M. Proline-rich extensin-like receptor kinases PERK5 and PERK12 are involved in pollen tube growth. FEBS Lett. 2021;595:2593–2607. doi: 10.1002/1873-3468.14185. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/1873-3468.14185)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34427925/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=FEBS%20Lett.&title=Proline-rich%20extensin-like%20receptor%20kinases%20PERK5%20and%20PERK12%20are%20involved%20in%20pollen%20tube%20growth&author=C.%20Borassi&author=A.R.%20Sede&author=M.A.%20Mecchia&author=S.%20Mangano&author=E.%20Marzol&volume=595&publication_year=2021&pages=2593-2607&pmid=34427925&doi=10.1002/1873-3468.14185&)\]
*   28.Parkin I.A.P., Gulden S.M., Sharpe A.G., Lukens L., Trick M., Osborn T.C., Lydiate D.J. Segmental structure of the genome based on comparative analysis with Arabidopsis thaliana. Genetics. 2005;171:765–781. doi: 10.1534/genetics.105.042093. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.105.042093)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1456786/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16020789/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genetics&title=Segmental%20structure%20of%20the%20genome%20based%20on%20comparative%20analysis%20with%20Arabidopsis%20thaliana&author=I.A.P.%20Parkin&author=S.M.%20Gulden&author=A.G.%20Sharpe&author=L.%20Lukens&author=M.%20Trick&volume=171&publication_year=2005&pages=765-781&pmid=16020789&doi=10.1534/genetics.105.042093&)\]
*   29.Lukens L.N., Quijada P.A., Udall J., Pires J.C., Schranz M.E., Osborn T.C. Genome redundancy and plasticity within ancient and recent Brassica crop species. Biol. J. Linn. Soc. 2004;82:665–674. doi: 10.1111/j.1095-8312.2004.00352.x. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1095-8312.2004.00352.x)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Biol.%20J.%20Linn.%20Soc.&title=Genome%20redundancy%20and%20plasticity%20within%20ancient%20and%20recent%20Brassica%20crop%20species&author=L.N.%20Lukens&author=P.A.%20Quijada&author=J.%20Udall&author=J.C.%20Pires&author=M.E.%20Schranz&volume=82&publication_year=2004&pages=665-674&doi=10.1111/j.1095-8312.2004.00352.x&)\]
*   30.Wittkopp P.J., Kalay G. Cis-regulatory elements: Molecular mechanisms and evolutionary processes underlying divergence. Nat. Rev. Genet. 2012;13:59–69. doi: 10.1038/nrg3095. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg3095)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22143240/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat.%20Rev.%20Genet.&title=Cis-regulatory%20elements:%20Molecular%20mechanisms%20and%20evolutionary%20processes%20underlying%20divergence&author=P.J.%20Wittkopp&author=G.%20Kalay&volume=13&publication_year=2012&pages=59-69&pmid=22143240&doi=10.1038/nrg3095&)\]
*   31.Bulgakov V.P., Wu H.C., Jinn T.L. Coordination of ABA and chaperone signaling in plant stress responses. Trends Plant Sci. 2019;24:636–651. doi: 10.1016/j.tplants.2019.04.004. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tplants.2019.04.004)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31085125/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Trends%20Plant%20Sci.&title=Coordination%20of%20ABA%20and%20chaperone%20signaling%20in%20plant%20stress%20responses&author=V.P.%20Bulgakov&author=H.C.%20Wu&author=T.L.%20Jinn&volume=24&publication_year=2019&pages=636-651&pmid=31085125&doi=10.1016/j.tplants.2019.04.004&)\]
*   32.Wu K., Xu H., Gao X.H., Fu X.D. New insights into gibberellin signaling in regulating plant growth-metabolic coordination. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 2021;63:102074. doi: 10.1016/j.pbi.2021.102074. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbi.2021.102074)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34217918/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr.%20Opin.%20Plant%20Biol.&title=New%20insights%20into%20gibberellin%20signaling%20in%20regulating%20plant%20growth-metabolic%20coordination&author=K.%20Wu&author=H.%20Xu&author=X.H.%20Gao&author=X.D.%20Fu&volume=63&publication_year=2021&pages=102074&pmid=34217918&doi=10.1016/j.pbi.2021.102074&)\]
*   33.Gomes G.L.B., Scortecci K.C. Auxin and its role in plant development: Structure, signalling, regulation and response mechanisms. Plant Biol. 2021;23:894–904. doi: 10.1111/plb.13303. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/plb.13303)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34396657/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Biol.&title=Auxin%20and%20its%20role%20in%20plant%20development:%20Structure,%20signalling,%20regulation%20and%20response%20mechanisms&author=G.L.B.%20Gomes&author=K.C.%20Scortecci&volume=23&publication_year=2021&pages=894-904&pmid=34396657&doi=10.1111/plb.13303&)\]
*   34.Wimalagunasekara S.S., Weeraman J.W.J.K., Tirimanne S., Fernando P.C. Protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analysis reveals important hub proteins and sub-network modules for root development in rice (Oryza sativa) J. Genet. Eng. Biotechnol. 2023;21:69. doi: 10.1186/s43141-023-00515-8. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s43141-023-00515-8)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10225403/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37246172/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Genet.%20Eng.%20Biotechnol.&title=Protein-protein%20interaction%20\(PPI\)%20network%20analysis%20reveals%20important%20hub%20proteins%20and%20sub-network%20modules%20for%20root%20development%20in%20rice%20\(Oryza%20sativa\)&author=S.S.%20Wimalagunasekara&author=J.W.J.K.%20Weeraman&author=S.%20Tirimanne&author=P.C.%20Fernando&volume=21&publication_year=2023&pages=69&pmid=37246172&doi=10.1186/s43141-023-00515-8&)\]
*   35.Borassi C., Sede A.R., Mecchia M.A., Salter J.D.S., Marzol E., Muschietti J.P., Estevez J.M. An update on cell surface proteins containing extensin-motifs. J. Exp. Bot. 2016;67:477–487. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erv455. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erv455)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26475923/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Exp.%20Bot.&title=An%20update%20on%20cell%20surface%20proteins%20containing%20extensin-motifs&author=C.%20Borassi&author=A.R.%20Sede&author=M.A.%20Mecchia&author=J.D.S.%20Salter&author=E.%20Marzol&volume=67&publication_year=2016&pages=477-487&pmid=26475923&doi=10.1093/jxb/erv455&)\]
*   36.Bacete L., Mélida H., Miedes E., Molina A. Plant cell wall-mediated immunity: Cell wall changes trigger disease resistance responses. Plant J. 2018;93:614–636. doi: 10.1111/tpj.13807. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/tpj.13807)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29266460/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20J.&title=Plant%20cell%20wall-mediated%20immunity:%20Cell%20wall%20changes%20trigger%20disease%20resistance%20responses&author=L.%20Bacete&author=H.%20M%C3%A9lida&author=E.%20Miedes&author=A.%20Molina&volume=93&publication_year=2018&pages=614-636&pmid=29266460&doi=10.1111/tpj.13807&)\]
*   37.Raja V., Majeed U., Kang H., Andrabi K.I., John R. Abiotic stress: Interplay between ROS, hormones and MAPKs. Environ. Exp. Bot. 2017;137:142–157. doi: 10.1016/j.envexpbot.2017.02.010. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envexpbot.2017.02.010)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Environ.%20Exp.%20Bot.&title=Abiotic%20stress:%20Interplay%20between%20ROS,%20hormones%20and%20MAPKs&author=V.%20Raja&author=U.%20Majeed&author=H.%20Kang&author=K.I.%20Andrabi&author=R.%20John&volume=137&publication_year=2017&pages=142-157&doi=10.1016/j.envexpbot.2017.02.010&)\]
*   38.Chen W., Li Y., Yan R.B., Ren L., Liu F., Zeng L.Y., Sun S.N., Yang H.H., Chen K.R., Xu L., et al. SnRK1.1-mediated resistance of Arabidopsis thaliana to clubroot disease is inhibited by the novel Plasmodiophora brassicae effector PBZF1. Mol. Plant Pathol. 2021;22:1057–1069. doi: 10.1111/mpp.13095. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/mpp.13095)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8358996/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34165877/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol.%20Plant%20Pathol.&title=SnRK1.1-mediated%20resistance%20of%20Arabidopsis%20thaliana%20to%20clubroot%20disease%20is%20inhibited%20by%20the%20novel%20Plasmodiophora%20brassicae%20effector%20PBZF1&author=W.%20Chen&author=Y.%20Li&author=R.B.%20Yan&author=L.%20Ren&author=F.%20Liu&volume=22&publication_year=2021&pages=1057-1069&pmid=34165877&doi=10.1111/mpp.13095&)\]
*   39.Kemen E., Jones J.D.G. Obligate biotroph parasitism: Can we link genomes to lifestyles? Trends Plant Sci. 2012;17:448–457. doi: 10.1016/j.tplants.2012.04.005. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tplants.2012.04.005)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22613788/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Trends%20Plant%20Sci.&title=Obligate%20biotroph%20parasitism:%20Can%20we%20link%20genomes%20to%20lifestyles?&author=E.%20Kemen&author=J.D.G.%20Jones&volume=17&publication_year=2012&pages=448-457&pmid=22613788&doi=10.1016/j.tplants.2012.04.005&)\]
*   40.Kong L., Li X., Zhan Z., Piao Z. Sugar transporters in Plasmodiophora brassicae: Genome-wide identification and functional verification. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022;23:5264. doi: 10.3390/ijms23095264. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23095264)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9099952/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35563657/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.%20J.%20Mol.%20Sci.&title=Sugar%20transporters%20in%20Plasmodiophora%20brassicae:%20Genome-wide%20identification%20and%20functional%20verification&author=L.%20Kong&author=X.%20Li&author=Z.%20Zhan&author=Z.%20Piao&volume=23&publication_year=2022&pages=5264&pmid=35563657&doi=10.3390/ijms23095264&)\]
*   41.Ali S., Ganai B.A., Kamili A.N., Bhat A.A., Mir Z.A., Bhat J.A., Tyagi A., Islam S.T., Mushtaq M., Yadav P., et al. Pathogenesis-related proteins and peptides as promising tools for engineering plants with multiple stress tolerance. Microbiol. Res. 2018;212:29–37. doi: 10.1016/j.micres.2018.04.008. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micres.2018.04.008)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29853166/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Microbiol.%20Res.&title=Pathogenesis-related%20proteins%20and%20peptides%20as%20promising%20tools%20for%20engineering%20plants%20with%20multiple%20stress%20tolerance&author=S.%20Ali&author=B.A.%20Ganai&author=A.N.%20Kamili&author=A.A.%20Bhat&author=Z.A.%20Mir&volume=212&publication_year=2018&pages=29-37&pmid=29853166&doi=10.1016/j.micres.2018.04.008&)\]
*   42.Lee D., Lal N.K., Lin Z.J.D., Ma S.S., Liu J., Castro B., Toruño T., Dinesh-Kumar S.P., Coaker G. Regulation of reactive oxygen species during plant immunity through phosphorylation and ubiquitination of RBOHD. Nat. Commun. 2020;11:1838. doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-15601-5. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-15601-5)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7160206/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32296066/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat.%20Commun.&title=Regulation%20of%20reactive%20oxygen%20species%20during%20plant%20immunity%20through%20phosphorylation%20and%20ubiquitination%20of%20RBOHD&author=D.%20Lee&author=N.K.%20Lal&author=Z.J.D.%20Lin&author=S.S.%20Ma&author=J.%20Liu&volume=11&publication_year=2020&pages=1838&pmid=32296066&doi=10.1038/s41467-020-15601-5&)\]
*   43.Ludwig-Muller J. Auxin homeostasis, signaling, and interaction with other growth hormones during the clubroot disease of Brassicaceae. Plant Signal. Behav. 2014;9:e28593. doi: 10.4161/psb.28593. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.4161/psb.28593)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4091609/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24699875/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Signal.%20Behav.&title=Auxin%20homeostasis,%20signaling,%20and%20interaction%20with%20other%20growth%20hormones%20during%20the%20clubroot%20disease%20of%20Brassicaceae&author=J.%20Ludwig-Muller&volume=9&publication_year=2014&pages=e28593&pmid=24699875&doi=10.4161/psb.28593&)\]
*   44.Xu L., Ren L., Chen K.R., Liu F., Fang X.P. Putative role of IAA during the early response of Brassica napus L. to Plasmodiophora brassicae. Eur. J. Plant Pathol. 2016;145:601–613. doi: 10.1007/s10658-016-0877-y. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10658-016-0877-y)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Eur.%20J.%20Plant%20Pathol.&title=Putative%20role%20of%20IAA%20during%20the%20early%20response%20of%20Brassica%20napus%20L.%20to%20Plasmodiophora%20brassicae&author=L.%20Xu&author=L.%20Ren&author=K.R.%20Chen&author=F.%20Liu&author=X.P.%20Fang&volume=145&publication_year=2016&pages=601-613&doi=10.1007/s10658-016-0877-y&)\]
*   45.Wei X.C., Liao R.J., Zhang X.W., Zhao Y.Y., Xie Z.Q., Yang S.J., Su H.A., Wang Z.Y., Zhang L.Y., Tian B.M., et al. Integrative transcriptome, miRNAs, degradome, and phytohormone analysis of Brassica rapa L. in response to Plasmodiophora brassicae. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2023;24:2652. doi: 10.3390/ijms24032414. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24032414)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9916777/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36768734/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Int.%20J.%20Mol.%20Sci.&title=Integrative%20transcriptome,%20miRNAs,%20degradome,%20and%20phytohormone%20analysis%20of%20Brassica%20rapa%20L.%20in%20response%20to%20Plasmodiophora%20brassicae&author=X.C.%20Wei&author=R.J.%20Liao&author=X.W.%20Zhang&author=Y.Y.%20Zhao&author=Z.Q.%20Xie&volume=24&publication_year=2023&pages=2652&pmid=36768734&doi=10.3390/ijms24032414&)\]
*   46.Yang Z.Q., Wang S.B., Wei L.L., Huang Y.M., Liu D.X., Jia Y.P., Luo C.F., Lin Y.C., Liang C.Y., Hu Y., et al. BnIR: A multi-omics database with various tools for research and breeding. Mol. Plant. 2023;16:775–789. doi: 10.1016/j.molp.2023.03.007. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molp.2023.03.007)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36919242/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol.%20Plant&title=BnIR:%20A%20multi-omics%20database%20with%20various%20tools%20for%20research%20and%20breeding&author=Z.Q.%20Yang&author=S.B.%20Wang&author=L.L.%20Wei&author=Y.M.%20Huang&author=D.X.%20Liu&volume=16&publication_year=2023&pages=775-789&pmid=36919242&doi=10.1016/j.molp.2023.03.007&)\]
*   47.Chou K.C., Shen H.B. A new method for predicting the subcellular localization of eukaryotic proteins with both single and multiple sites: Euk-mPLoc 2.0. PLoS ONE. 2010;5:e9931. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009931. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0009931)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2848569/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20368981/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20ONE&title=A%20new%20method%20for%20predicting%20the%20subcellular%20localization%20of%20eukaryotic%20proteins%20with%20both%20single%20and%20multiple%20sites:%20Euk-mPLoc%202.0&author=K.C.%20Chou&author=H.B.%20Shen&volume=5&publication_year=2010&pages=e9931&pmid=20368981&doi=10.1371/journal.pone.0009931&)\]
*   48.Wang Y.P., Tang H.B., Wang X.Y., Sun Y., Joseph P.V., Paterson A.H. Detection of colinear blocks and synteny and evolutionary analyses based on utilization of MCScanX. Nat. Protoc. 2024;19:2206–2229. doi: 10.1038/s41596-024-00968-2. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41596-024-00968-2)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38491145/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat.%20Protoc.&title=Detection%20of%20colinear%20blocks%20and%20synteny%20and%20evolutionary%20analyses%20based%20on%20utilization%20of%20MCScanX&author=Y.P.%20Wang&author=H.B.%20Tang&author=X.Y.%20Wang&author=Y.%20Sun&author=P.V.%20Joseph&volume=19&publication_year=2024&pages=2206-2229&pmid=38491145&doi=10.1038/s41596-024-00968-2&)\]
*   49.Krzywinski M., Schein J., Birol I., Connors J., Gascoyne R., Horsman D., Jones S.J., Marra M.A. Circos: An information aesthetic for comparative genomics. Genome Res. 2009;19:1639–1645. doi: 10.1101/gr.092759.109. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.092759.109)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2752132/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19541911/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genome%20Res.&title=Circos:%20An%20information%20aesthetic%20for%20comparative%20genomics&author=M.%20Krzywinski&author=J.%20Schein&author=I.%20Birol&author=J.%20Connors&author=R.%20Gascoyne&volume=19&publication_year=2009&pages=1639-1645&pmid=19541911&doi=10.1101/gr.092759.109&)\]
*   50.Zhang Z., Xiao J.F., Wu J.Y., Zhang H.Y., Liu G.M., Wang X.M., Dai L. ParaAT: A parallel tool for constructing multiple protein-coding DNA alignments. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2012;419:779–781. doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.02.101. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.02.101)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22390928/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Biochem.%20Biophys.%20Res.%20Commun.&title=ParaAT:%20A%20parallel%20tool%20for%20constructing%20multiple%20protein-coding%20DNA%20alignments&author=Z.%20Zhang&author=J.F.%20Xiao&author=J.Y.%20Wu&author=H.Y.%20Zhang&author=G.M.%20Liu&volume=419&publication_year=2012&pages=779-781&pmid=22390928&doi=10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.02.101&)\]
*   51.Chen C.J., Wu Y., Li J.W., Wang X., Zeng Z.H., Xu J., Liu Y.L., Feng J.T., Chen H., He Y.H., et al. TBtools-II: A “one for all, all for one” bioinformatics platform for biological big-data mining. Mol. Plant. 2023;16:1733–1742. doi: 10.1016/j.molp.2023.09.010. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molp.2023.09.010)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37740491/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol.%20Plant&title=TBtools-II:%20A%20%E2%80%9Cone%20for%20all,%20all%20for%20one%E2%80%9D%20bioinformatics%20platform%20for%20biological%20big-data%20mining&author=C.J.%20Chen&author=Y.%20Wu&author=J.W.%20Li&author=X.%20Wang&author=Z.H.%20Zeng&volume=16&publication_year=2023&pages=1733-1742&pmid=37740491&doi=10.1016/j.molp.2023.09.010&)\]
*   52.Tamura K., Stecher G., Kumar S. MEGA11 Molecular Evolutionary Genetics Analysis Version 11. Mol. Biol. Evol. 2021;38:3022–3027. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab120. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msab120)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8233496/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33892491/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol.%20Biol.%20Evol.&title=MEGA11%20Molecular%20Evolutionary%20Genetics%20Analysis%20Version%2011&author=K.%20Tamura&author=G.%20Stecher&author=S.%20Kumar&volume=38&publication_year=2021&pages=3022-3027&pmid=33892491&doi=10.1093/molbev/msab120&)\]
*   53.Lescot M., Déhais P., Thijs G., Marchal K., Moreau Y., Van de Peer Y., Rouzé P., Rombauts S. PlantCARE, a database of plant cis-acting regulatory elements and a portal to tools for in silico analysis of promoter sequences. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002;30:325–327. doi: 10.1093/nar/30.1.325. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/30.1.325)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC99092/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11752327/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nucleic%20Acids%20Res.&title=PlantCARE,%20a%20database%20of%20plant%20cis-acting%20regulatory%20elements%20and%20a%20portal%20to%20tools%20for%20in%20silico%20analysis%20of%20promoter%20sequences&author=M.%20Lescot&author=P.%20D%C3%A9hais&author=G.%20Thijs&author=K.%20Marchal&author=Y.%20Moreau&volume=30&publication_year=2002&pages=325-327&pmid=11752327&doi=10.1093/nar/30.1.325&)\]
*   54.Otasek D., Morris J.H., Bouças J., Pico A.R., Demchak B. Cytoscape Automation: Empowering workflow-based network analysis. Genome Biol. 2019;20:185. doi: 10.1186/s13059-019-1758-4. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-019-1758-4)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6717989/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31477170/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genome%20Biol.&title=Cytoscape%20Automation:%20Empowering%20workflow-based%20network%20analysis&author=D.%20Otasek&author=J.H.%20Morris&author=J.%20Bou%C3%A7as&author=A.R.%20Pico&author=B.%20Demchak&volume=20&publication_year=2019&pages=185&pmid=31477170&doi=10.1186/s13059-019-1758-4&)\]
*   55.Cui X.B., Hu M., Yao S.L., Zhang Y.Y., Tang M.Q., Liu L.J., Cheng X.H., Tong C.B., Liu S.Y. BnaOmics: A comprehensive platform combining pan-genome and multi-omics data from Brassica napus. Plant Commun. 2023;4:100609. doi: 10.1016/j.xplc.2023.100609. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xplc.2023.100609)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10504585/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37098652/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Plant%20Commun.&title=BnaOmics:%20A%20comprehensive%20platform%20combining%20pan-genome%20and%20multi-omics%20data%20from%20Brassica%20napus&author=X.B.%20Cui&author=M.%20Hu&author=S.L.%20Yao&author=Y.Y.%20Zhang&author=M.Q.%20Tang&volume=4&publication_year=2023&pages=100609&pmid=37098652&doi=10.1016/j.xplc.2023.100609&)\]
*   56.Xu L., Yang H., Ren L., Chen W., Liu L.J., Liu F., Zeng L.Y., Yan R.B., Chen K.R., Fang X.P. Jasmonic acid-mediated aliphatic glucosinolate metabolism is involved in clubroot disease development in Brassica napus L. Front. Plant Sci. 2018;9:750. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2018.00750. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2018.00750)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5996939/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29922320/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Front.%20Plant%20Sci.&title=Jasmonic%20acid-mediated%20aliphatic%20glucosinolate%20metabolism%20is%20involved%20in%20clubroot%20disease%20development%20in%20Brassica%20napus%20L.&author=L.%20Xu&author=H.%20Yang&author=L.%20Ren&author=W.%20Chen&author=L.J.%20Liu&volume=9&publication_year=2018&pages=750&pmid=29922320&doi=10.3389/fpls.2018.00750&)\]
*   57.Pfaffl M.W. A new mathematical model for relative quantification in real-time RT-PCR. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001;29:e45. doi: 10.1093/nar/29.9.e45. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/29.9.e45)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC55695/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11328886/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nucleic%20Acids%20Res.&title=A%20new%20mathematical%20model%20for%20relative%20quantification%20in%20real-time%20RT-PCR&author=M.W.%20Pfaffl&volume=29&publication_year=2001&pages=e45&pmid=11328886&doi=10.1093/nar/29.9.e45&)\]

## Associated Data

_This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article._

### Supplementary Materials

### Data Availability Statement

Data are contained within the article and [Supplementary Materials](#app1-ijms-26-02685).