---
title: "Ehrlichia chaffeensis replication sites in adult Drosophila melanogaster"
authors: ["Rishi Drolia", "Tonia Von Ohlen", "Stephen K Chapes"]
journal: "International journal of medical microbiology : IJMM"
date: "2013 Jan 8"
doi: "10.1016/j.ijmm.2012.12.002"
source_url: "https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3558598/"
---

# Ehrlichia chaffeensis replication sites in adult Drosophila melanogaster

*International journal of medical microbiology : IJMM*, 2013 Jan 8, [doi:10.1016/j.ijmm.2012.12.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmm.2012.12.002)

### Rishi Drolia
### Tonia Von Ohlen
### Stephen K Chapes

. Author manuscript; available in PMC: 2014 Jan 8.

_Published in final edited form as:_ Int J Med Microbiol. 2013 Jan 8;303(1):40–49. doi: [10.1016/j.ijmm.2012.12.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmm.2012.12.002)

## Abstract

_Ehrlichia chaffeensis_ is a Gram-negative, obligate intracellular bacterium which causes the tick-borne disease human monocytic ehrlichiosis. In vertebrates, _E. chaffeensis_ replicates in monocytes and macrophages. However, no clear cell or tissue tropism has been defined in arthropods. Our group identified two host genes that control _E. chaffeensis_ replication and infection in vivo in _Drosophila_, _Uridine cytidine kinase_ and _separation anxiety_. Using the _UAS-GAL4_ RNAi system, we generated F1 flies (_UAS-gene of interest RNAi_ x _tissue-GAL4_ flies) that have _Uck2_ or _san_ silenced in ubiquitous or tissue-specific fashion. When _Uck2_ or _san_ were suppressed in the hemocytes or in the fat body, _E. chaffeensis_ replicated poorly and caused significantly less severe infections. Silencing of these genes in the eyes, wings, or the salivary glands did not impact fly susceptibility or bacterial replication. Our data suggest that in _Drosophila_, _E. chaffeensis_ replicates within the hemocytes, the insect homolog of mammalian macrophages, and in the fat body, the liver homolog of mammals.

**Keywords:** Hemocytes, RNAi, Host-bacteria interactions, Intracellular bacteria

## Introduction

Human monocytic ehrlichiosis (HME) is a tick-borne, zoonotic disease caused by the Gram-negative, obligate intracellular bacterium, _Ehrlichia chaffeensis. E. chaffeensis_ is primarily vectored by _Amblyomma americanum_ (lone star tick) ([Anderson et al., 1993](#R2)) and is transmitted transstadially in ticks ([Parola et al., 2005](#R34)). _A. americanum_ has a 3-host life cycle. For progression from one stage to the next (larva to nymph to adult), the tick requires a vertebrate blood meal ([Parola et al., 2005](#R34)). The major natural reservoir of _E. chaffeensis_ in the United States is white-tailed deer (_Odocoileus virginianus_) ([Dawson et al., 1994](#R10); [Lockhart et al., 1997](#R26)). However, several other vertebrates, too, act as reservoirs including domestic dog ([Yu et al., 2008](#R50)), domestic goat ([Dugan et al., 2000](#R16)), white-footed mouse ([Magnarelli et al., 1997](#R29)), red fox ([Davidson et al., 1999](#R9)), raccoon ([Dugan et al., 2005](#R15)), and coyote ([Kocan et al., 2000](#R22)). Humans can also become accidental hosts when bitten by ticks. In humans, the bacteria are monocytotropic, meaning they are primarily found in monocytes and macrophages, and there is a good understanding of where the bacteria replicate ([Sotomayor et al., 2001](#R44)). Although it is clear that ticks can transmit _Ehrlichia_ organisms to vertebrate hosts ([Ewing et al., 1995](#R17); [Varela-Stokes, 2007](#R46)), and _Ehrlichia_ bacteria have been detected in the salivary glands microscopically ([Smith et al., 1976](#R42)) and by PCR ([Karim et al., 2012](#R21)), it is less clear about bacteria replication in ticks. Although genetic tools for working with ticks are currently being developed ([Pagel Van Zee et al., 2007](#R33)), the available tools do not begin to approach those that are available in other arthropods such as _Drosophila melanogaster_.

In adult _D. melanogaster_, hemocytes contribute to host immune defenses against _E. chaffeensis_ ([Luce-Fedrow et al., 2009](#R28)). In vertebrates, monocytes and macrophages contribute to host resistance ([Chapes and Ganta, 2008](#R6); [Ganta et al., 2002](#R19)) even though the bacteria are monocytotropic. Our group has discovered that _D. melanogaster_ genes, _separation anxiety_ (_san_) and _Uridine cytidine kinase 2_ (_Uck2_), are required for _E. chaffeensis_ infections in flies ([Von Ohlen et al., 2012](#R47)). Flies carrying mutations in the coding regions of these genes do not support infection after needle injection ([Von Ohlen et al., 2012](#R47)). Therefore, to see if bacterial replication in arthropods parallels bacterial replication in vertebrates after needle injection, we took advantage of _Drosophila UAS-GAL4_ RNAi system ([Dietzl et al., 2007](#R11)) that allowed for tissue-specific silencing of _san_ and _Uck2_ to determine host sites of bacterial replication. Here, we show that similar to vertebrate hosts, in _Drosophila_ the bacteria require optimal host conditions (i.e. expression of _Uck2_ or _san_) in the immune tissues, hemocytes, and fat body, for optimal replication.

## Materials and methods

### Cell lines and _E. chaffeensis_ infections

_E. chaffeensis_ (Arkansas isolate) was propagated in DH82 cells (American Type Culture collection, #CRL-10389, Rockville, Md.). The DH82 cells were grown in Eagle’s minimal essential medium supplemented with 3.5% fetal bovine serum (Atlanta Biologicals, Atlanta, GA), 3.5% NuSerum (BD, Franklin Lakes, NJ), and Glutamine plus (2 mM, Atlanta Biologicals) (EMEM7). Cells were grown at 37°C in an 8% CO2/92% air atmosphere. The level of infection was determined by examining cyto-centrifuged cells stained with Dif-Quik stain (Fisher Scientific Company, Kalamazoo, MI). When more than 80% of cells were infected, the cells were removed with a cell scraper and frozen at −80°C in cryogenic vials. Bacteria numbers were quantified using a TaqMan-based quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR (qRT-PCR) assay as described below. Purification of host cell-free bacteria was carried out as follows. Cells were scraped from tissue culture dishes. The recovered infected cells were placed in a 50-ml, sterile centrifuge tube and shaken with glass beads. The preparation was centrifuged at 600 × g for 20 min. The supernatant with host cell-free bacteria was transferred into a sterile tube and centrifuged at 15,000 × g for 20 min. The bacterial pellet was resuspended in sterile phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) mixed with blue food dye at a ratio of 0.6 ml dye for every 1 ml of PBS to help us visualize the inoculum during fly injections. Most flies were injected with 6000 bacteria per fly, however, some early experiments were done with 1500 bacteria per fly. Although the severity of infections was different with the different inocula, the experimental trends were similar.

### D. melanogaster

_D. melanogaster_ flies were raised on standard dextrose/molasses/yeast medium at 18–29°C. The following fly lines were used: _yellow white_ (_yw_) and _arm-GAL4_, _Hml-GAL4_, _YP1-GAL4_, _MS1096-GAL4_, _Gmr-GAL4_, _Fhk-GAL4_, _UAS-Uck2RNAi_ (w\[1118\]; P{GD2761}v16719)and _UAS-sanRNAi_ (w\[1118\]; P{GD7580}v31742). The _yw_ fly line was maintained at Kansas State University and used as a wild type in these experiments ([Von Ohlen et al., 2009](#R48)). The _armadillo_ (_arm_)_\-Gal_ fly line ([Sanson et al., 1996](#R39)) was obtained from Joan Hooper (University of Colorado, Anchutz Medical campus, Denver, CO). The _Fhk-GAL4_ and _YP1-GAL4_ were obtained from Tony Ip (The University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA). The _Hml-GAL4_ fly line was obtained from Michael Galko (MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX). The _MS1096_ and _Gmr-GAL4_ fly lines were obtained from the Bloomington _Drosophila_ Stock Center at Indiana University, Bloomington, IN. _UAS_\-dsRNA transgenic fly lines were obtained from the Vienna _Drosophila_ RNAi Center (VDRC) ([Dietzl et al., 2007](#R11)). Five to seven virgin females carrying the _GAL4_ promoter were crossed with 3–4 males carrying different _UAS_\-dsRNA transgenes to generate F1 flies that had tissue-specific or ubiquitous knockdown of _Uck2_ or _san_ genes.

### RNA extraction

The TriReagent (Molecular Research Center, Cincinnati, OH) RNA extraction method, as was previously described by our group ([Luce-Fedrow et al., 2009](#R28)), was used to extract RNA from flies or host cell-free bacteria. Pelleted bacteria or fly homogenates were resuspended in 1 ml of TriReagent. Preparations were transferred to 2.0 ml, Heavy Phase Lock Gel tubes (5 Prime/Eppendorf, Westbury, New York; #2302830). Three hundred microliters (300 μl) of chloroform were added, and the mixture was vortexed for 15 s. The samples were centrifuged at 12,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C, and the aqueous phase was transferred to clean 1.5 ml tubes. Five hundred microliters (500 μl) of isopropanol were added, and RNA was precipitated at −20°C for 24 h. Samples were subsequently centrifuged at 12,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C. The RNA pellet was washed with 1 ml of 70% ethanol, and samples were centrifuged at 7400 × g for 5 min at 4°C. The 70% ethanol was decanted from the pellet, and residual ethanol was allowed to evaporate for 5 min. RNA was resuspended in 50 μl of nuclease-free water. RNA concentrations were determined spectrophotometrically (NanoDrop Technologies, Wilmington, DE).

### Quantification of bacterial numbers for infection/injection and in infected flies

RNA from host cell-free _Ehrlichia_ was extracted as described above. A TaqMan-based, real-time reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) was used to quantify bacterial numbers ([Sirigireddy and Ganta, 2005](#R41)). A total of 500–1000 ng of RNA was used for each reaction. Real-time quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) was performed using the Invitrogen’s One-Step Platinum qRT-PCR kit (#11732) in a Cepheid Smart Cycler (Cepheid, Sunnyvale, CA). _E. chaffeensis_ RNA was detected using primers specific for the 16S ribosomal RNA gene ([Sirigireddy and Ganta, 2005](#R41)) (NCBI Accession # [M73222](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/M73222)). Custom-synthesized primers and probes were obtained from Integrated DNA Technologies (IDT, Coralville, IA) and were used. The sequence of the primers used were: forward primer, RRG3 (5′ CAATTGCTTATAACCTTTTGGTTATAAAT 3′) and reverse primer, RRG27 (5′ GTATTACCGCGGCTGCTGGCAC3′). Serial 10-fold dilutions of the RNA from infected DH82 cells were used to generate standard curves plotting log number of bacteria versus the corresponding Ct value. The cycling conditions used for the assay were: 48°C for 30 min, 94°C for 4 min, then 35 cycles of 94°C for 30 s, 52°C for 30 s, and 72°C for 1 min. To quantify bacterial numbers in injected/infected flies, anesthetized flies were transferred to 1.5-ml tubes (Kimble Chase, Vineland, NJ) and crushed with disposable pestles in 1 ml of TriReagent as previously described ([Luce-Fedrow et al., 2009](#R28)). Bacteria numbers were estimated from RNA samples using quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) as described above. _Drosophila_ ribosomal _protein 15a_ (NCBI Accession #[NM\_136772](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NM_136772)) gene was used as used as housekeeping. The sequence of the primers used were: forward primer (5′ TGGACCACGAGGAGGCTAGG 3′) and reverse primer (5′ GTTGGTGCATGGTCGGTGA 3′) and Taqman probe (5′-56-FAM/TGGGAGGCAAAATTCTCGGCTTC/36-TAMsp-3′). The cycling conditions used for the assay were: 48°C for 45 min, 94°C for 2 min, and then 35 cycles of 94°C for 45 s, 50°C for 1 min, and 72°C for 1.5 min.

### Estimation of silencing efficiency

To quantify the level of transcriptional silencing in RNAi flies, whole-flies or specific fly tissues were used to probe for specific transcript levels. Fly tissues were transferred to 1.5-ml tubes and crushed with disposable pestles in 1 ml of TriReagent for RNA extraction. Transcript levels of the gene of interest in F1 flies were assessed in the following whole-flies: ubiquitous (UAS-_sanRNAi_ X _arm-GAL4_ or _UAS-Uck2RNAi_ X _arm-GAL4_); hemocytes (_UAS_\-_sanRNAi_ X _Hml-GAL4_ or _UAS-Uck2RNAi_ X _Hml-GAL4_); fat body (_UAS-sanRNAi_ X _YP1-GAL4_ or _UAS-Uck2RNAi_ X _YP1-GAL4_). For wing-specific and eye-specific knockdown, fly heads or wings were used. For fat body-specific and salivary gland-specific knockdown, fat body or salivary glands dissected from wandering third-instar larvae were used. RNA from homogenates was extracted as described above. Transcript levels were determined in RNA samples using qRT-PCR using the Invitrogen’s Superscript III Platinum SYBR Green One-Step qRT-PCR kit in. Primers were obtained from IDT. _Drosophila ribosomal protein 15a_ was used as used as the housekeeping gene. _Drosophila Uck2_ (NCBI Accession #[NM\_142984](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NM_142984)) was detected using forward primer (5′ TGTCCATCAGTCAGGACAGC 3′) and reverse primer (5′ CTCCACTTTGTGGCCCTTTA 3′). The cycling conditions used for the assay were 48°C for 30 min, 95°C for 3 min, and then 45 cycles of 95°C for 15 s, 56°C for 30 s, and 60°C for 1 min. The _Drosophila san_ gene (NCBI Accession # [NM\_080040](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NM_080040)) was detected using forward primer (5′ ACCCGAACAATCAGGAACAG 3′) and reverse primer (5′ ACCCGAACAATCAGGAACAG 3′). The cycling conditions used for the assay were 48°C for 30 min, 95°C for 3 min, and then 45 cycles of 95°C for 15 s, 50°C for 30 s, and 60°C for 1 min.

To calculate knockdown efficiency serial 10-fold dilutions of RNA and corresponding Ct values were used to plot standard curves (mean of 3 experiments). Primer efficiency was calculated using the following equation ([Pfaffl, 2001](#R37)):

Efficiency\=10(\-1/slopeofstandardcurve).

Primer efficiency values were used to calculate the relative change in gene expression by the following equation ([Pfaffl, 2001](#R37)):

(EfficiencyofgeneinterestGeneinterest:ΔCtcontrol\-treated)(EfficiencyofhousekeepinggeneHousekeepinggene:ΔCtcontrol\-treated)

Parental lines (_UAS_ and _GAL4_ constructs) and _yw_ flies served as normal controls and were set at 100% expression for the gene of interest. Relative level of gene expression in RNAi flies as compared to controls was calculated to estimate the knockdown efficiency.

### Infections

Adult flies were used to assess the effect of gene knockdown on _E. chaffeensis_ infections. Male and female flies were anesthetized on a CO2 anesthesia pad (Genesee Scientific, San Diego, CA; model# 59-119). Flies were injected in the thorax with 51 nl of sterile PBS-blue food dye solution or _Ehrlichia_ resuspended in PBS-blue food dye solution. Injections were made in the abdomen of the fly with pulled glass capillary needles using a Nanoject II (Drummond Scientific Company, Broomall, PA). Following injection, flies were maintained in clean bottles with molasses/yeast caps. Survival was monitored daily for 4 days. Twenty flies were injected per treatment group per experiment with 3–4 independent experiments for survival data. Four to five flies were used to determine bacterial infection.

### Statistics

Survival data were analyzed for significance using the log-rank test of Kaplan Meier plots using Prism Graphpad software (La Jolla, CA). Data are presented as the mean ± standard error (SE) of independent experiments unless otherwise stated. _P_ values of <0.05 were considered highly significant. Bacterial numbers were analyzed by Student’s _t_ test (two-tailed, general) by using the StatMost Statistical Package (Data XIOM, Los Angeles, CA, USA). Unless indicated, data are presented as the mean ± standard error (SE) of independent experiments.

## Results

### _Uck2_ and _san_ are required for in vivo _E. chaffeensis_ replication in adult _D. melanogaster_

_E. chaffeensis_ is capable of infecting and completing its life cycle in _Drosophila_ S2 cells and adult flies ([Luce-Fedrow et al., 2008](#R27), [2009](#R28)). Recent work by our group found that several host genes control the replication of _Ehrlichia_ in vivo([Von Ohlen et al., 2012](#R47)). We found that flies carrying mutations in coding regions of these genes were poorly infected by _E. chaffeensis_. In particular, 2 genes that are relevant to humans and ticks were chosen for this study, _Uck2_ and _san. Uck2_ functions as a uridine-cytidine kinase and is orthologous to the mammalian _UCK2_ gene ([McQuilton et al., 2012](#R31)) and the _Ixodes scapularis_ SCW003812 gene ([Lawson et al., 2009](#R23)). _san_ is the ortholog to the human _NAA50_ gene and encodes the N(α)-acetyltransferase 50 protein. It is orthologous to the _I. scapularis_ SCW002560 gene ([Lawson et al., 2009](#R23)).

In vertebrates, _E. chaffeensis_ exhibits a tropism for monocytes and macrophages ([Paddock and Childs, 2003](#R32); [Sotomayor et al., 2001](#R44)). However, no clear requirements for cell or tissue tropism have been defined in ticks or other arthropods. To investigate where _E. chaffeensis_ replicates in arthropods, we employed whole-organism in vivo RNAi in _D. melanogaster_ to do tissue-specific inactivation of _Uck2_ and _san_ using a fly collection that consists of expressed RNAi transgenes where the inverted repeats produce a dsRNA hairpin that produces the RNAi effect. These tools allowed us to silence _Uck2_ and _san_ genes in a tissue-specific manner through the binary _GAL4-UAS_ system ([Brand and Perrimon, 1993](#R3); [Dietzl et al., 2007](#R11)) to determine what tissues must be permissive (via their expression of _Uck2_ or _san_) for _E. chaffeensis_ replication.

To determine whether _Uck2_ and _san_ could be efficiently silenced using the _UAS-GAL4_ system, we individually crossed transgenic flies carrying inverted repeats of the _Uck2_ and _san_ genes under the control of _UAS_ to flies carrying _armadillo (arm)-GAL4_ (ubiquitous _GAL4_ insertions) to silence _Uck2_ or _san_ in the F1 progeny. We consistently averaged 78% or better transcript reduction of _Uck2_ or _san_ in the RNAi flies in comparison to wild-type flies and parental lines using qRT-PCR ([Table 1](#T1)). When wild-type flies, parental line flies, and _Uck2_\- and _san_\-RNAi flies were experimentally challenged with _E. chaffeensis_ in the abdomen, we observed that there was approximately 48% death in wild-type and parental lines after 96 h. This rate of death was significantly increased compared to control flies injected with PBS or flies which had ubiquitous tissue expression of _Uck2_\-or _san_\-RNAi ([Fig. 1A and 1B](#F1)) (_P_<0.05, log rank test). When we assessed the effect of infection on RNAi flies where _Uck2_ or _san_ were knocked down ubiquitously, we detected significantly fewer bacteria at 96 hpi (_P_<0.05, _t_\-test) compared to wild-type or parental fly controls ([Fig. 2A and 2B](#F2)). These experiments confirmed that the _UAS-GAL4_ technique could be used to efficiently silence _Uck2_ and _san_ in adult flies and that _E. chaffeensis_ infection in flies was dependent on functional _Uck2_ and _san_ genes.

#### Table 1.

Silencing. Silencing efficiency of target genes that had ubiquitously expressed hairpin RNA or hairpin RNA expressed specifically in hemocytes or the fat body[a](#TFN1).

| Tissues in which the target gene was knocked down | Tissue assayed[b](#TFN2) | Target Gene | % knockdown efficiency of target gene in F1 progeny compared to wild-type (_yw_) controls[c](#TFN3) | % knockdown efficiency of target gene in F1 progeny compared to _UAS_ construct (parental line 1)[c](#TFN3) | % knockdown efficiency of target gene in F1 progeny compared to _GAL4_ construct (parental line 2)[c](#TFN3) | Average % knockdown efficiency of target gene in F1 progeny compared to control flies[d](#TFN4) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Ubiquitous (_arm-Gal4_) | Whole adult body | _Uck2_ | 86 ± 4 | 90 ± 5 | 89 ± 9 | 88 ± 2 |
| Whole adult body | _san_ | 86 ± 2 | 86 ±5 | 78 ± 4 | 83 ± 5 |
| Hemocytes (_Hml-Gal4_) | Whole adult body | _Uck2_ | 76 ± 8 | 85 ± 5 | 73 ± 3 | 79 ± 6 |
| Whole adult body | _san_ | 61 ± 0 | 59 ± 2 | 66 ± 1 | 62 ± 4 |
| Fat Body (_YP1-Gal4_) | Whole adult body | _Uck2_ | 55 ± 1 | 26 ± 9 | 23 ± 1 | 35 ±18 |
| Whole adult body | _san_ | 46 ± 2 | 28 ± 4 | 52 ± 3 | 42 ± 12 |
| Fat body (_YP1-Gal4_) | Fat body, 3rd instar larvae | _Uck2_ | 75 | 85 | 70 | 77 ± 8 |
| Fat body (_YP1-Gal4_) | Fat body, 3rd instar larvae | _san_ | 79 | 57 | 62 | 66 ± 12 |

a

Percent (%) knockdown efficiency of target gene in RNAi flies (F1’s) compared to wild type and parental lines (_UAS_ and _GAL4_ constructs).

b

RNA was isolated from a pool of 10–12 whole flies or isolated fat bodies. Analysis of transcript level was done using qRT-PCR results as described in the ‘Materials and methods’.

c

Data presented represent the mean ± SD of one or 3 independent experiments.

d

Numbers presented represent the mean ± SD of _yw_ and parental fly lines 1 and 2 (columns 4–6).

### _E. chaffeensis_ replication in adult _D. melanogaster_

Ubiquitous tissue silencing of _Uck2_ and _san_ impaired _E. chaffeensis_ infection in adult _D. melanogaster_. Therefore, we screened an array of tissues to determine if _Uck2_ or _san_ expression were necessary in those tissues for bacterial replication. In vertebrates, _E. chaffeensis_ exhibits a tropism for monocytes and macrophages ([Paddock and Childs, 2003](#R32)). Therefore, we hypothesized that _E. chaffeensis_ replicates in hemocytes, the insect equivalent to mammalian macrophages. To test this hypothesis, we silenced _Uck2_ and _san_ in the eyes, wings, hemocytes, fat body, and salivary glands in a tissue-specific manner in adult flies. We used eye-specific (_Gmr-GAL4_), wing-specific (_MS1096-GAL4_), hemocyte-specific (_Hml-GAL4_), fat body-specific (_YP1-Gal_), or salivary gland-specific (_Fhk-GAL4_) _GAL4_ fly lines to generate F1 flies. To confirm the tissue-specific knockdown of targeted genes, we dissected whole heads and wings from adult flies to assess eye-specific and wing-specific adult knockdown. We observed an average ≥74% reduction in transcript levels of _Uck2_ and _san_ in whole heads or wings of F1 transgenic flies using eye- or wing-specific _GAL4_ constructs ([Table 2](#T2)). In comparison, the average knockdown of _Uck2_ or _san_ in the whole body minus the respective eyes or wings never averaged >15% knockdown ([Table 2](#T2)). These data confirmed the tissue-specific targeting of both _Uck2_ and _san_ genes.

#### Table 2.

Determination of off-target silencing in wings, eyes, and body[a](#TFN5),[b](#TFN6).

| Tissues in which the target gene was knocked down | Experiment | Target gene | % knockdown efficiency of target gene in F1 progeny compared to wild-type (_yw_) controls[c](#TFN7) | % knockdown efficiency of target gene in F1 progeny compared to _UAS_ construct (parental line 1)[c](#TFN7) | % knockdown efficiency of target gene in F1 progeny compared to _GAL4_ construct (parental line 2)[c](#TFN7) | Average % knockdown efficiency of target gene in F1 progeny compared to control flies[d](#TFN8) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Wings (_MS1096-GAL4_) | 1 | _Uck2_ | 81 ±2 | 66 ± 6 | 81 ± 7 | 76 ± 9 |
| 1 | _san_ | 77 ± 7 | 82 ± 22 | 86 ± 14 | 82 ± 5 |
| Body (_MS1096-GAL4_) | 1 | _Uck2_ | −26 ± 11 | −8 ± 3 | 11 ± 2 | −8 ± 19 |
| 1 | _san_ | −41 | 17 | 20 | −1 ± 34 |
| Whole heads (_Gmr-GAL4_) | 2 | _Uck2_ | 86 ± 4 | 88 ± 5 | 89 ± 9 | 88 ± 2 |
| 2 | _san_ | 57 ± 2 | 85 ±7 | 81 ± 7 | 74 ±15 |
| Body (_Gmr-GAL4_) | 2 | _Uck2_ | 23 ± 4 | 12 ± 3 | 8 ± 3 | 14 ± 8 |
| 2 | _san_ | 10 ± 0 | 25 ± 6 | 9 ± 3 | 15 ± 10 |
| Salivary glands (_Fhk-GAL4_) | 3 | _Uck2_ | 92 | 97 | 96 | 95 ± 2 |
| 3 | _san_ | 93 | 96 | 82 | 90 ± 6 |
| Body (_Fhk-GAL4_) | 3 | _Uck2_ | 16 | 32 | 36 | 28 ± 9 |
| 3 | _san_ | 18 | 22 | 30 | 23 ± 5 |

a

Comparison of knockdown efficiency of target genes in F1 RNAi flies in wings compared to whole body (without wings) generated using _MS1096-GAL4_ flies (Experiment 1), whole heads compared to whole-body tissue (abdomen and thorax) generated using _Gmr-GAL4_ flies (Experiment 2), or salivary glands from 3rd instar larvae compared to whole-body tissue (without salivary glands) generated using _Fhk- GAL4_ flies (Experiment 2) in comparison to wild type and parental lines (_UAS_ and _GAL4_ constructs).

b

Analysis of transcript level was done using qRT-PCR as described in the ‘Materials and methods’. Negative numbers indicate higher transcript levels.

c

Numbers presented represent the mean ± SD of one or 3 independent experiments.

d

Numbers presented represent the mean ± SD of yw and parental lines 1 and 2 (columns 4–6).

We used whole adult flies to assess hemocyte-specific knockdown using the hemocyte-specific _GAL4_ line to express _Uck2_ and _san_\-RNAi transgenes specifically in hemocytes. We found that RNA levels were reduced by an average of 79±6% and 62±4%, respectively, when compared to experimental controls ([Table 1](#T1)). Because the _Hml-Gal4_ line is highly specific for expression in the hemocytes, we can reasonably assume that the reduction in RNA levels in these whole flies is due to specific knockdown of the transcript in hemocytes and not other tissues ([Dietzl et al., 2007](#R11)). The fat body and salivary glands are difficult to dissect from adult flies. Since the RNAi effect is applicable at all stages of the _Drosophila_ lifespan ([Dietzl et al., 2007](#R11)), we isolated the fat bodies and salivary glands from 3rd instar larvae to assess the silencing efficiency specifically in the fat body and salivary glands of our RNAi flies. In the dissected fat body from fat body-specific _Uck2_ and _san_\-RNAi third instar larvae, there was an average of 77±8% and 66±12% reduction in transcript levels, respectively, compared to dissected fat body from 3rd instar control larvae from wild-type or parental flies ([Table 1](#T1)). Similarly, transcript levels in dissected salivary glands from salivary gland-specific _Uck2_ and _san_\-RNAi 3rd instar larvae showed that RNA levels were reduced >90% in comparison to dissected salivary glands from control larvae from wild-type or parental flies ([Table 2](#T2)). In contrast, there was <29% knockdown of _san_ or _Uck2_ in RNA samples extracted from non-salivary gland tissue isolated from 3rd instar larvae in comparison to non-salivary gland tissue from control larvae from wild-type or parental flies ([Table 2](#T2)).

After confirming tissue-specific RNAi silencing effect of _Uck2_ and _san_, control and RNAi flies were experimentally challenged with _E. chaffeensis_. We observed that eye- ([Fig. 3A and 3B](#F3)), salivary gland- ([Fig. 3C and 3D](#F3)), and wing- ([Fig. 3E and 3F](#F3)) specific knockdown of _Uck2_ and _san_ did not impact fly survival. These RNAi flies were as susceptible to _E. chaffeensis_ infection as wild-type and parental controls ([Fig. 3](#F3); _P_\>0.05, log-rank tests). In contrast, hemocyte- and fat body-specific _Uck2-_ ([Fig. 4A and 4C](#F4))and _san_\- ([Fig. 4B and 4D](#F4)) RNAi flies survived significantly better (_P_<0.05, log-rank test) than the control flies after infection with _Ehrlichia_ ([Fig. 4A–D](#F4)). Ninety-six hours after infection, >80% of hemocyte-specific _Uck2_\-RNAi and _San_\-RNAi flies survived in comparison to an average of 50% of wild-type and parental control flies. When we assessed F1 RNAi flies for bacteria load, there were no differences in bacteria number in eye-specific ([Fig. 5A and 5B](#F5)), salivary gland-specific ([Fig. 5C and 5D](#F5)), and wing-specific ([Fig. 5E and 5F](#F5)) _Uck2_ and _san_ F1 RNAi flies compared to control flies (_P_\>0.05, _t_\-test). However, F1 RNAi flies with hemocyte-specific ([Fig. 6A and 6B](#F6)) or fat body-specific ([Fig. 6C and 6D](#F6)) knockdown of _Uck2_ or _san_ had significantly fewer bacteria (_P_<0.05, _t_\-test). At the 96-h time point, there were greater than 95% fewer bacteria in hemocyte-specific ([Fig. 6A and 6B](#F6)) or fat body-specific ([Fig. 6C and 6D](#F6)) _Uck2-_ or _san_\-RNAi flies, respectively, compared to controls.

## Discussion

_E. chaffeensis_ is transmitted from ticks to vertebrate hosts when the tick takes a blood meal ([Paddock and Childs, 2003](#R32)). One remaining question is where do the bacteria replicate in the tick? Because the genetic tools in ticks have not been developed to the same extent as they have in _Drosophila_, we addressed a more general question about where the bacteria replicate in dipteran arthropods. Indeed, this study provides insights about _E. chaffeensis_ replication in arthropods. Our data confirm that _Uck2_ and _san_ are needed for _E. chaffeensis_ replication ([Von Ohlen et al., 2012](#R47)) and support the hypothesis that the bacteria replicate in the hemocytes or the fat body in adult _D. melanogaster_. Infection was poorer in flies that had hemocyte- or fat body-specific knockdown of _Uck2_ or _san._ We concede that fruit flies and ticks have different life cycles, feeding habits, and environments, and this may not allow extrapolation of the results to the tick system. Nevertheless, this is a valuable study because it identifies sites where the bacteria replicate in a model arthropod system using experimental methods which would not have been possible in the tick system.

We demonstrated that _E. chaffeensis_ replicated when _Uck2_ and _san_ were expressed in hemocytes and the fat body, but not when these genes were silenced in those tissues. Silencing of _Uck2_ and _san_ in the eyes, wings, or the salivary glands of adult _D. melanogaster_ did not affect infection. Because of the tissue-specific knockdown of the genes in these tissues ([Dietzl et al., 2007](#R11)), the data suggest that bacterial replication occurs predominantly in the hemocytes and the fat body. These data are consistent with the vertebrate tropism for macrophages and monocytes ([Paddock and Childs, 2003](#R32); [Sotomayor et al., 2001](#R44)). Hemocytes are the arthropod host equivalent of macrophages ([Lemaitre and Hoffmann, 2007](#R25)). The fat body is functionally equivalent to mammalian liver ([Lemaitre and Hoffmann, 2007](#R25)). These data are also consistent with the previous observation that _Rickettsia rickettsii_ invade hemocytes in ixodid ticks ([Socolovschi et al., 2009](#R43)). Previously, our group found that _E. chaffeensis_ is capable of replicating in hemocyte-like phagocytic S2 cells ([Luce-Fedrow et al., 2008](#R27)). S2 cells have hemocyte-like properties and express a variety of hemocyte markers such as Hemolectin _(Hml)_ ([Charroux and Royet, 2009](#R7)), Hemese _(He)_ ([Lebestky et al., 2000](#R24)), _Drosophila_ scavenger receptor-CI (_dSR-CI_) ([Pearson et al., 1995](#R35)), and croquemort, a member of the CD36 superfamily ([Franc et al., 1999](#R18)). However, because these cells have combined properties of plasmatocytes and crystal cells, we could not conclude that they are hemocytes ([Cherbas et al., 2011](#R8)). We also found that _E. chaffeensis_ labeled with the pH-sensitive dye pHrodo fluoresced red after injection into adult flies, presumably because they were in the low pH environment of the hemocytes ([Luce-Fedrow et al., 2009](#R28)). Therefore, these new in vivo data add to the growing evidence that _E. chaffeensis_ is capable of replicating in the hemocytes of adult _D. melanogaster_. Furthermore, these data are consistent with the behavior of other intracellular pathogens which are capable of avoiding the phagocytic pathway and replicate within _Drosophila_ hemocytes. These pathogens include _Salmonella typhimurium_ ([Brandt et al., 2004](#R4)), _Listeria monocytogenes_ ([Mansfield et al., 2003](#R30)), _Mycobacterium marinum_ ([Dionne et al., 2003](#R13)), _Legionella pneumophila_ ([Dorer et al., 2006](#R14)), and _Francisella tularensis_ ([Vonkavaara et al., 2008](#R49)).

The expression of _Uck2_ or _san_ in the salivary glands of adult _D. melanogaster_ was not necessary for _E. chaffeensis_ infection. These findings were intriguing since _A. phagocytophilum_, a bacterium closely related to _E. chaffeensis_, and _E. chaffeensis_ have been detected in the salivary glands of experimentally infected ticks ([Karim et al., 2012](#R21); [Rikihisa, 2011](#R38)). In our experiments, _Drosophila_ were infected by needle injection in the abdomen; not the natural route of infection in a tick. Ticks acquire the infection from a vertebrate host during their blood meal ([Paddock and Childs, 2003](#R32)). Thus, the dissemination of _E. chaffeensis_ to assorted tissues may vary due to differences in route of infection. Interestingly, in ticks, needle injection does result in bacteria in the salivary glands ([Karim et al., 2012](#R21)). However, it is possible that salivary gland and host physiology may vary among arthropods depending on the life cycle. In nature, _Drosophila_ live on yeast growing on decaying fruit and food. This could suggest that their salivary glands are better adapted to fight potential pathogenic microorganisms and extrapolation of the data from _Drosophila_ to ticks needs to be done cautiously.

We observed 97% fewer bacteria 96 h post infection in fat body-specific _Uck2_ or _san_\- F1 RNAi flies compared to wild-type and parental controls. Because there is tissue-specific knockdown in the fat body, some residual bacterial replication should occur in the hemocytes of the flies. Indeed, this might have been the case. In general, when one looks at the bacteria growth kinetics in tissues that are not affected by _Uck2_ or _san_ knockdown (eyes, wings, salivary glands), bacterial numbers generally increase over time after infection ([Fig. 5](#F5)). In contrast, when _Uck2_ or _san_ genes were silenced in hemocytes, bacteria failed to grow ([Fig. 6A and 6B](#F6)). However, when _Uck2_ or _san_ genes were silenced specifically in the fat body, the bacteria growth kinetics showed an initial increase in bacterial numbers for 24 h that paralleled the growth of the bacteria in the parental (non-RNAi control) fly lines ([Fig. 6A and 6B](#F6)). Subsequently, the bacterial numbers were reduced ([Fig. 6C and 6D](#F6)). These data suggest that the bacteria were replicating during the early part of the infection in the hemocytes, but because the bacteria were not replicating in the fat body, the activation of the fly immune system was able to respond more effectively against _E. chaffeensis_ than when the bacteria replicate in both hemocytes and the fat body. We have previously found that hemocytes in adult flies as well as toll and IMD defense pathways are actively involved in host defense against _E. chaffeensis_ ([Luce-Fedrow et al., 2009](#R28)). Alternatively, the failure of bacteria to thrive even in the presence of functional _Uck2_ and _san_ genes in hemocytes might be because there is coordination between the hemocytes and the fat body. Several observations indicate that hemocytes can signal to the fat body to regulate the humoral immune response ([Agaisse et al., 2003](#R1); [Brennan et al., 2007](#R5); [Dijkers and O’Farrell, 2007](#R12); [Shia et al., 2009](#R40)). Thus, signaling between the hemocytes and other immunocompetent tissue such as the fat body may play a critical role in coordinating the cellular and humoral immune response to ensure efficient defense of the organism.

Our results suggest that the tissue tropism of _E. chaffeensis_ for phagocytic cells arose approximately 600 million years ago, since that is when mammals and dipterans last shared a common ancestor ([Gordon and Waterhouse, 2007](#R20); [Pesole et al., 1991](#R36)). Ticks and dipterans last shared a common ancestor approximately 500 million years ago ([Ullmann et al., 2005](#R45)). Therefore, one would expect the tropism for hemocytes to be similar in ticks. However, genetic drift could have occurred in the Ecdysozoa, Arthropoda, or later in the Chelicerata ([Gordon and Waterhouse, 2007](#R20)). There is 59.5% identity between _D. melanogaster_ and _I. scapularis Uck2_ gene products and 83.6% identity between _D. melanogaster_ and _I. scapularis san_ gene products ([Lawson et al., 2009](#R23)). Therefore, it is not clear, whether this tropism will also be seen in _A. americanum_, the vector of _E. chaffeensis_. Additional experiments are needed to confirm this hypothesis.

In conclusion, we have used _UAS-GAL4_ RNAi system in _D. melanogaster_ to show that functional _Uck2_ and _san_ genes are required for in vivo _E. chaffeensis_ replication. Moreover, we have successfully identified intracellular niches where _E. chaffeensis_ replicates in dipteran arthopods; the hemocytes and fat body of adult _D. melanogaster_. We hope that understanding the tissue targets of _E. chaffeensis_ in arthropods will help in drug design and RNAi therapeutics for HME and other tick- and arthropod-borne diseases.

## Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Ms. Rachel Nichols, Ms. Victoria Davidson, and Mr. Taylor Kinney for their help with the flies. We thank Drs. Alison Luce-Fedrow and Teresa Ortega for valuable help in the lab. We thank Dr. Roman Ganta for his valuable discussions about _E. chaffeensis_. This project has been supported in part by NIH grants AI088070, AI55052, AI052206, RR16475, GM103418 and RR17686, the Kansas Agriculture Experiment Station Animal Health Project grant 481848, the Kansas Space Grant Consortium, NASA grant NNX08BA91G, American Heart Association grant 0950036G, the Terry C. Johnson Center for Basic Cancer Research, and the Kansas Agriculture Experiment Station. This is Kansas Agriculture Experiment Station publication 12-456-J.

## Footnotes

**Publisher's Disclaimer:** This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

## References

1.  Agaisse H, Petersen UM, Boutros M, Mathey-Prevot B, Perrimon N. Signaling role of hemocytes in Drosophila JAK/STAT-dependent response to septic injury. Developmental Cell. 2003;5:441–450. doi: 10.1016/s1534-5807(03)00244-2. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1534-5807\(03\)00244-2)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12967563/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Developmental%20Cell&title=Signaling%20role%20of%20hemocytes%20in%20Drosophila%20JAK/STAT-dependent%20response%20to%20septic%20injury&author=H%20Agaisse&author=UM%20Petersen&author=M%20Boutros&author=B%20Mathey-Prevot&author=N%20Perrimon&volume=5&publication_year=2003&pages=441-450&pmid=12967563&doi=10.1016/s1534-5807\(03\)00244-2&)\]
2.  Anderson BE, Sims KG, Olson JG, Childs JE, Piesman JF, Happ CM, Maupin GO, Johnson BJ. Amblyomma americanum: a potential vector of human ehrlichiosis. American J Trop Med Hyg. 1993;49:239–244. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.1993.49.239. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.1993.49.239)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8357086/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=American%20J%20Trop%20Med%20Hyg&title=Amblyomma%20americanum:%20a%20potential%20vector%20of%20human%20ehrlichiosis&author=BE%20Anderson&author=KG%20Sims&author=JG%20Olson&author=JE%20Childs&author=JF%20Piesman&volume=49&publication_year=1993&pages=239-244&pmid=8357086&doi=10.4269/ajtmh.1993.49.239&)\]
3.  Brand AH, Perrimon N. Targeted gene expression as a means of altering cell fates and generating dominant phenotypes. Development. 1993;118:401–415. doi: 10.1242/dev.118.2.401. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.118.2.401)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8223268/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Development&title=Targeted%20gene%20expression%20as%20a%20means%20of%20altering%20cell%20fates%20and%20generating%20dominant%20phenotypes&author=AH%20Brand&author=N%20Perrimon&volume=118&publication_year=1993&pages=401-415&pmid=8223268&doi=10.1242/dev.118.2.401&)\]
4.  Brandt SM, Dionne MS, Khush RS, Pham LN, Vigdal TJ, Schneider DS. Secreted bacterial effectors and host-produced Eiger/TNF drive death in a Salmonella-infected fruit fly. PLoS biology. 2004;2:e418. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0020418. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.0020418)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC532388/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15562316/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20biology&title=Secreted%20bacterial%20effectors%20and%20host-produced%20Eiger/TNF%20drive%20death%20in%20a%20Salmonella-infected%20fruit%20fly&author=SM%20Brandt&author=MS%20Dionne&author=RS%20Khush&author=LN%20Pham&author=TJ%20Vigdal&volume=2&publication_year=2004&pages=e418&pmid=15562316&doi=10.1371/journal.pbio.0020418&)\]
5.  Brennan CA, Delaney JR, Schneider DS, Anderson KV. Psidin is required in Drosophila blood cells for both phagocytic degradation and immune activation of the fat body. Current Biology. 2007;17:67–72. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2006.11.026. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2006.11.026)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17208189/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Current%20Biology&title=Psidin%20is%20required%20in%20Drosophila%20blood%20cells%20for%20both%20phagocytic%20degradation%20and%20immune%20activation%20of%20the%20fat%20body&author=CA%20Brennan&author=JR%20Delaney&author=DS%20Schneider&author=KV%20Anderson&volume=17&publication_year=2007&pages=67-72&pmid=17208189&doi=10.1016/j.cub.2006.11.026&)\]
6.  Chapes SK, Ganta RR. Defining the immune response to Ehrlichia species using murine models. Veterinary Parasitology. 2008;158:344–359. doi: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2008.09.028. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vetpar.2008.09.028)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2610453/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19028013/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Veterinary%20Parasitology&title=Defining%20the%20immune%20response%20to%20Ehrlichia%20species%20using%20murine%20models&author=SK%20Chapes&author=RR%20Ganta&volume=158&publication_year=2008&pages=344-359&pmid=19028013&doi=10.1016/j.vetpar.2008.09.028&)\]
7.  Charroux B, Royet J. Elimination of plasmatocytes by targeted apoptosis reveals their role in multiple aspects of the Drosophila immune response. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2009;106:9797–9802. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0903971106. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0903971106)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2700997/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19482944/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc%20Natl%20Acad%20Sci%20USA&title=Elimination%20of%20plasmatocytes%20by%20targeted%20apoptosis%20reveals%20their%20role%20in%20multiple%20aspects%20of%20the%20Drosophila%20immune%20response&author=B%20Charroux&author=J%20Royet&volume=106&publication_year=2009&pages=9797-9802&pmid=19482944&doi=10.1073/pnas.0903971106&)\]
8.  Cherbas L, Willingham A, Zhang D, Yang L, Zou Y, Eads BD, Carlson JW, Landolin JM, Kapranov P, Dumais J, Samsonova A, Choi JH, Roberts J, Davis CA, Tang H, van Baren MJ, Ghosh S, Dobin A, Bell K, Lin W, Langton L, Duff MO, Tenney AE, Zaleski C, Brent MR, Hoskins RA, Kaufman TC, Andrews J, Graveley BR, Perrimon N, Celniker SE, Gingeras TR, Cherbas P. The transcriptional diversity of 25 Drosophila cell lines. Genome Res. 2011;21:301–314. doi: 10.1101/gr.112961.110. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.112961.110)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3032933/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21177962/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genome%20Res&title=The%20transcriptional%20diversity%20of%2025%20Drosophila%20cell%20lines&author=L%20Cherbas&author=A%20Willingham&author=D%20Zhang&author=L%20Yang&author=Y%20Zou&volume=21&publication_year=2011&pages=301-314&pmid=21177962&doi=10.1101/gr.112961.110&)\]
9.  Davidson WR, Lockhart JM, Stallknecht DE, Howerth EW. Susceptibility of red and gray foxes to infection by Ehrlichia chaffeensis. J Wildl Dis. 1999;35:696–702. doi: 10.7589/0090-3558-35.4.696. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.7589/0090-3558-35.4.696)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10574528/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Wildl%20Dis&title=Susceptibility%20of%20red%20and%20gray%20foxes%20to%20infection%20by%20Ehrlichia%20chaffeensis&author=WR%20Davidson&author=JM%20Lockhart&author=DE%20Stallknecht&author=EW%20Howerth&volume=35&publication_year=1999&pages=696-702&pmid=10574528&doi=10.7589/0090-3558-35.4.696&)\]
10.  Dawson JE, Childs JE, Biggie KL, Moore C, Stallknecht D, Shaddock J, Bouseman J, Hofmeister E, Olson JG. White-tailed deer as a potential reservoir of Ehrlichia spp. J Wildl Dis. 1994;30:162–168. doi: 10.7589/0090-3558-30.2.162. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.7589/0090-3558-30.2.162)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8028099/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Wildl%20Dis&title=White-tailed%20deer%20as%20a%20potential%20reservoir%20of%20Ehrlichia%20spp&author=JE%20Dawson&author=JE%20Childs&author=KL%20Biggie&author=C%20Moore&author=D%20Stallknecht&volume=30&publication_year=1994&pages=162-168&pmid=8028099&doi=10.7589/0090-3558-30.2.162&)\]
11.  Dietzl G, Chen D, Schnorrer F, Su KC, Barinova Y, Fellner M, Gasser B, Kinsey K, Oppel S, Scheiblauer S, Couto A, Marra V, Keleman K, Dickson BJ. A genome-wide transgenic RNAi library for conditional gene inactivation in Drosophila. Nature. 2007;448:151–156. doi: 10.1038/nature05954. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature05954)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17625558/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nature&title=A%20genome-wide%20transgenic%20RNAi%20library%20for%20conditional%20gene%20inactivation%20in%20Drosophila&author=G%20Dietzl&author=D%20Chen&author=F%20Schnorrer&author=KC%20Su&author=Y%20Barinova&volume=448&publication_year=2007&pages=151-156&pmid=17625558&doi=10.1038/nature05954&)\]
12.  Dijkers PF, O’Farrell PH. Drosophila calcineurin promotes induction of innate immune responses. Current Biology. 2007;17:2087–2093. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2007.11.001. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2007.11.001)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2180389/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18060786/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Current%20Biology&title=Drosophila%20calcineurin%20promotes%20induction%20of%20innate%20immune%20responses&author=PF%20Dijkers&author=PH%20O%E2%80%99Farrell&volume=17&publication_year=2007&pages=2087-2093&pmid=18060786&doi=10.1016/j.cub.2007.11.001&)\]
13.  Dionne MS, Ghori N, Schneider DS. Drosophila melanogaster is a genetically tractable model host for Mycobacterium marinum. Infect Immun. 2003;71:3540–3550. doi: 10.1128/IAI.71.6.3540-3550.2003. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1128/IAI.71.6.3540-3550.2003)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC155752/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12761139/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Infect%20Immun&title=Drosophila%20melanogaster%20is%20a%20genetically%20tractable%20model%20host%20for%20Mycobacterium%20marinum&author=MS%20Dionne&author=N%20Ghori&author=DS%20Schneider&volume=71&publication_year=2003&pages=3540-3550&pmid=12761139&doi=10.1128/IAI.71.6.3540-3550.2003&)\]
14.  Dorer MS, Kirton D, Bader JS, Isberg RR. RNA interference analysis of Legionella in Drosophila cells: exploitation of early secretory apparatus dynamics. PLoS Pathogens. 2006;2:e34. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.0020034. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.0020034)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1447669/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16652170/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20Pathogens&title=RNA%20interference%20analysis%20of%20Legionella%20in%20Drosophila%20cells:%20exploitation%20of%20early%20secretory%20apparatus%20dynamics&author=MS%20Dorer&author=D%20Kirton&author=JS%20Bader&author=RR%20Isberg&volume=2&publication_year=2006&pages=e34&pmid=16652170&doi=10.1371/journal.ppat.0020034&)\]
15.  Dugan VG, Gaydos JK, Stallknecht DE, Little SE, Beall AD, Mead DG, Hurd CC, Davidson WR. Detection of Ehrlichia spp. in raccoons (Procyon lotor) from Georgia. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis. 2005;5:162–171. doi: 10.1089/vbz.2005.5.162. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1089/vbz.2005.5.162)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16011433/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Vector%20Borne%20Zoonotic%20Dis&title=Detection%20of%20Ehrlichia%20spp.%20in%20raccoons%20\(Procyon%20lotor\)%20from%20Georgia&author=VG%20Dugan&author=JK%20Gaydos&author=DE%20Stallknecht&author=SE%20Little&author=AD%20Beall&volume=5&publication_year=2005&pages=162-171&pmid=16011433&doi=10.1089/vbz.2005.5.162&)\]
16.  Dugan VG, Little SE, Stallknecht DE, Beall AD. Natural infection of domestic goats with Ehrlichia chaffeensis. Journal of Clinical Microbiology. 2000;38:448–449. doi: 10.1128/jcm.38.1.448-449.2000. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1128/jcm.38.1.448-449.2000)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC88747/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10618139/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Journal%20of%20Clinical%20Microbiology&title=Natural%20infection%20of%20domestic%20goats%20with%20Ehrlichia%20chaffeensis&author=VG%20Dugan&author=SE%20Little&author=DE%20Stallknecht&author=AD%20Beall&volume=38&publication_year=2000&pages=448-449&pmid=10618139&doi=10.1128/jcm.38.1.448-449.2000&)\]
17.  Ewing SA, Dawson JE, Kocan AA, Barker RW, Warner CK, Panciera RJ, Fox JC, Kocan KM, Blouin EF. Experimental transmission of Ehrlichia chaffeensis (Rickettsiales: Ehrlichieae) among white-tailed deer by Amblyomma americanum (Acari: Ixodidae) J Med Entomol. 1995;32:368–374. doi: 10.1093/jmedent/32.3.368. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/jmedent/32.3.368)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7616529/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Med%20Entomol&title=Experimental%20transmission%20of%20Ehrlichia%20chaffeensis%20\(Rickettsiales:%20Ehrlichieae\)%20among%20white-tailed%20deer%20by%20Amblyomma%20americanum%20\(Acari:%20Ixodidae\)&author=SA%20Ewing&author=JE%20Dawson&author=AA%20Kocan&author=RW%20Barker&author=CK%20Warner&volume=32&publication_year=1995&pages=368-374&pmid=7616529&doi=10.1093/jmedent/32.3.368&)\]
18.  Franc NC, Heitzler P, Ezekowitz RA, White K. Science. Vol. 284. New York, N.Y: 1999. Requirement for croquemort in phagocytosis of apoptotic cells in Drosophila; pp. 1991–1994. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.284.5422.1991)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10373118/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Science&author=NC%20Franc&author=P%20Heitzler&author=RA%20Ezekowitz&author=K%20White&publication_year=1999&)\]
19.  Ganta RR, Wilkerson MJ, Cheng C, Rokey AM, Chapes SK. Persistent Ehrlichia chaffeensis infection occurs in the absence of functional MHCII genes. Infect Immun. 2002;70:380–388. doi: 10.1128/IAI.70.1.380-388.2002. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1128/IAI.70.1.380-388.2002)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC127650/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11748204/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Infect%20Immun&title=Persistent%20Ehrlichia%20chaffeensis%20infection%20occurs%20in%20the%20absence%20of%20functional%20MHCII%20genes&author=RR%20Ganta&author=MJ%20Wilkerson&author=C%20Cheng&author=AM%20Rokey&author=SK%20Chapes&volume=70&publication_year=2002&pages=380-388&pmid=11748204&doi=10.1128/IAI.70.1.380-388.2002&)\]
20.  Gordon KHJ, Waterhouse PM. RNAi for insect-proof plants. Nat Biotech. 2007;25:1231–1232. doi: 10.1038/nbt1107-1231. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt1107-1231)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17989682/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat%20Biotech&title=RNAi%20for%20insect-proof%20plants&author=KHJ%20Gordon&author=PM%20Waterhouse&volume=25&publication_year=2007&pages=1231-1232&pmid=17989682&doi=10.1038/nbt1107-1231&)\]
21.  Karim S, Browning R, Ali L, Truhett R. Laboratory-infected Ehrlichia chaffeensis female adult Amblyomma americanum salivary glands reveal differential gene expression. Journal of Medical Entomology. 2012;49:547–554. doi: 10.1603/me11214. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1603/me11214)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22679861/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Journal%20of%20Medical%20Entomology&title=Laboratory-infected%20Ehrlichia%20chaffeensis%20female%20adult%20Amblyomma%20americanum%20salivary%20glands%20reveal%20differential%20gene%20expression&author=S%20Karim&author=R%20Browning&author=L%20Ali&author=R%20Truhett&volume=49&publication_year=2012&pages=547-554&pmid=22679861&doi=10.1603/me11214&)\]
22.  Kocan AA, Levesque GC, Whitworth LC, Murphy GL, Ewing SA, Barker RW. Naturally occurring Ehrlichia chaffeensis infection in coyotes from Oklahoma. Emerg Infect Dis. 2000;6:477–480. doi: 10.3201/eid0605.000505. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3201/eid0605.000505)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2627953/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10998377/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Emerg%20Infect%20Dis&title=Naturally%20occurring%20Ehrlichia%20chaffeensis%20infection%20in%20coyotes%20from%20Oklahoma&author=AA%20Kocan&author=GC%20Levesque&author=LC%20Whitworth&author=GL%20Murphy&author=SA%20Ewing&volume=6&publication_year=2000&pages=477-480&pmid=10998377&doi=10.3201/eid0605.000505&)\]
23.  Lawson D, Arensburger P, Atkinson P, Besansky NJ, Bruggner RV, Butler R, Campbell KS, Christophides GK, Christley S, Dialynas E, Hammond M, Hill CA, Konopinski N, Lobo NF, MacCallum RM, Madey G, Megy K, Meyer J, Redmond S, Severson DW, Stinson EO, Topalis P, Birney E, Gelbart WM, Kafatos FC, Louis C, Collins FH. VectorBase: a data resource for invertebrate vector genomics. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009;37:D583–D587. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn857. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkn857)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2686483/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19028744/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nucleic%20Acids%20Res&title=VectorBase:%20a%20data%20resource%20for%20invertebrate%20vector%20genomics&author=D%20Lawson&author=P%20Arensburger&author=P%20Atkinson&author=NJ%20Besansky&author=RV%20Bruggner&volume=37&publication_year=2009&pages=D583-D587&pmid=19028744&doi=10.1093/nar/gkn857&)\]
24.  Lebestky T, Chang T, Hartenstein V, Banerjee U. Specification of Drosophila hematopoietic lineage by conserved transcription factors. Science. 2000;288:146–149. doi: 10.1126/science.288.5463.146. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.288.5463.146)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10753120/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Science&title=Specification%20of%20Drosophila%20hematopoietic%20lineage%20by%20conserved%20transcription%20factors&author=T%20Lebestky&author=T%20Chang&author=V%20Hartenstein&author=U%20Banerjee&volume=288&publication_year=2000&pages=146-149&pmid=10753120&doi=10.1126/science.288.5463.146&)\]
25.  Lemaitre B, Hoffmann J. The host defense of Drosophila melanogaster. Annu Rev Immunol. 2007;25:697–743. doi: 10.1146/annurev.immunol.25.022106.141615. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.immunol.25.022106.141615)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17201680/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Annu%20Rev%20Immunol&title=The%20host%20defense%20of%20Drosophila%20melanogaster&author=B%20Lemaitre&author=J%20Hoffmann&volume=25&publication_year=2007&pages=697-743&pmid=17201680&doi=10.1146/annurev.immunol.25.022106.141615&)\]
26.  Lockhart JM, Davidson WR, Stallknecht DE, Dawson JE, Howerth EW. Isolation of Ehrlichia chaffeensis from wild white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus) confirms their role as natural reservoir hosts. J Clin Microbiol. 1997;35:1681–1686. doi: 10.1128/jcm.35.7.1681-1686.1997. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1128/jcm.35.7.1681-1686.1997)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC229821/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9196173/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Clin%20Microbiol&title=Isolation%20of%20Ehrlichia%20chaffeensis%20from%20wild%20white-tailed%20deer%20\(Odocoileus%20virginianus\)%20confirms%20their%20role%20as%20natural%20reservoir%20hosts&author=JM%20Lockhart&author=WR%20Davidson&author=DE%20Stallknecht&author=JE%20Dawson&author=EW%20Howerth&volume=35&publication_year=1997&pages=1681-1686&pmid=9196173&doi=10.1128/jcm.35.7.1681-1686.1997&)\]
27.  Luce-Fedrow A, Von Ohlen T, Boyle D, Ganta RR, Chapes SK. Use of Drosophila S2 cells as a model for studying Ehrlichia chaffeensis infections. Applied Environ Microbiol. 2008;74:1886–1891. doi: 10.1128/AEM.02467-07. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.02467-07)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2268305/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18245255/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Applied%20Environ%20Microbiol&title=Use%20of%20Drosophila%20S2%20cells%20as%20a%20model%20for%20studying%20Ehrlichia%20chaffeensis%20infections&author=A%20Luce-Fedrow&author=T%20Von%20Ohlen&author=D%20Boyle&author=RR%20Ganta&author=SK%20Chapes&volume=74&publication_year=2008&pages=1886-1891&pmid=18245255&doi=10.1128/AEM.02467-07&)\]
28.  Luce-Fedrow A, Von Ohlen T, Chapes SK. Ehrlichia chaffeensis infections in Drosophila melanogaster. Infect Immun. 2009;77:4815–4826. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00594-09. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1128/IAI.00594-09)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2772521/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19687202/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Infect%20Immun&title=Ehrlichia%20chaffeensis%20infections%20in%20Drosophila%20melanogaster&author=A%20Luce-Fedrow&author=T%20Von%20Ohlen&author=SK%20Chapes&volume=77&publication_year=2009&pages=4815-4826&pmid=19687202&doi=10.1128/IAI.00594-09&)\]
29.  Magnarelli LA, Anderson JF, Stafford KC, 3rd, Dumler JS. Antibodies to multiple tick-borne pathogens of babesiosis, ehrlichiosis, and Lyme borreliosis in white-footed mice. J Wildl Dis. 1997;33:466–473. doi: 10.7589/0090-3558-33.3.466. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.7589/0090-3558-33.3.466)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9249691/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Wildl%20Dis&title=Antibodies%20to%20multiple%20tick-borne%20pathogens%20of%20babesiosis,%20ehrlichiosis,%20and%20Lyme%20borreliosis%20in%20white-footed%20mice&author=LA%20Magnarelli&author=JF%20Anderson&author=KC%20Stafford&author=JS%20Dumler&volume=33&publication_year=1997&pages=466-473&pmid=9249691&doi=10.7589/0090-3558-33.3.466&)\]
30.  Mansfield BE, Dionne MS, Schneider DS, Freitag NE. Exploration of host-pathogen interactions using Listeria monocytogenes and Drosophila melanogaster. Cell Microbiol. 2003;5:901–911. doi: 10.1046/j.1462-5822.2003.00329.x. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1462-5822.2003.00329.x)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14641175/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell%20Microbiol&title=Exploration%20of%20host-pathogen%20interactions%20using%20Listeria%20monocytogenes%20and%20Drosophila%20melanogaster&author=BE%20Mansfield&author=MS%20Dionne&author=DS%20Schneider&author=NE%20Freitag&volume=5&publication_year=2003&pages=901-911&pmid=14641175&doi=10.1046/j.1462-5822.2003.00329.x&)\]
31.  McQuilton P, St Pierre SE, Thurmond J, FlyBase C. FlyBase 101 – the basics of navigating FlyBase. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012;40:D706–714. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr1030. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkr1030)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3245098/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22127867/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nucleic%20Acids%20Res&title=FlyBase%20101%20%E2%80%93%20the%20basics%20of%20navigating%20FlyBase&author=P%20McQuilton&author=SE%20St%20Pierre&author=J%20Thurmond&author=C%20FlyBase&volume=40&publication_year=2012&pages=D706-714&pmid=22127867&doi=10.1093/nar/gkr1030&)\]
32.  Paddock CD, Childs JE. Ehrlichia chaffeensis: a prototypical emerging pathogen. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2003;16:37–64. doi: 10.1128/CMR.16.1.37-64.2003. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1128/CMR.16.1.37-64.2003)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC145301/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12525424/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Microbiol%20Rev&title=Ehrlichia%20chaffeensis:%20a%20prototypical%20emerging%20pathogen&author=CD%20Paddock&author=JE%20Childs&volume=16&publication_year=2003&pages=37-64&pmid=12525424&doi=10.1128/CMR.16.1.37-64.2003&)\]
33.  Pagel Van Zee J, Geraci NS, Guerrero FD, Wikel SK, Stuart JJ, Nene VM, Hill CA. Tick genomics: The Ixodes genome project and beyond. International J Parasitol. 2007;37:1297–1305. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2007.05.011. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpara.2007.05.011)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17624352/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=International%20J%20Parasitol&title=Tick%20genomics:%20The%20Ixodes%20genome%20project%20and%20beyond&author=J%20Pagel%20Van%20Zee&author=NS%20Geraci&author=FD%20Guerrero&author=SK%20Wikel&author=JJ%20Stuart&volume=37&publication_year=2007&pages=1297-1305&pmid=17624352&doi=10.1016/j.ijpara.2007.05.011&)\]
34.  Parola P, Davoust B, Raoult D. Tick- and flea-borne rickettsial emerging zoonoses. Vet Res. 2005;36:469–492. doi: 10.1051/vetres:2005004. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1051/vetres:2005004)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15845235/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Vet%20Res&title=Tick-%20and%20flea-borne%20rickettsial%20emerging%20zoonoses&author=P%20Parola&author=B%20Davoust&author=D%20Raoult&volume=36&publication_year=2005&pages=469-492&pmid=15845235&doi=10.1051/vetres:2005004&)\]
35.  Pearson A, Lux A, Krieger M. Expression cloning of dSR-CI, a class C macrophage-specific scavenger receptor from Drosophila melanogaster. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1995;92:4056–4060. doi: 10.1073/pnas.92.9.4056. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.92.9.4056)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC42101/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7732030/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc%20Natl%20Acad%20Sci%20USA&title=Expression%20cloning%20of%20dSR-CI,%20a%20class%20C%20macrophage-specific%20scavenger%20receptor%20from%20Drosophila%20melanogaster&author=A%20Pearson&author=A%20Lux&author=M%20Krieger&volume=92&publication_year=1995&pages=4056-4060&pmid=7732030&doi=10.1073/pnas.92.9.4056&)\]
36.  Pesole G, Bozzetti MP, Lanave C, Preparata G, Saccone C. Glutamine synthetase gene evolution: a good molecular clock. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1991;88:522–526. doi: 10.1073/pnas.88.2.522. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.88.2.522)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC50843/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1671172/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc%20Natl%20Acad%20Sci%20USA&title=Glutamine%20synthetase%20gene%20evolution:%20a%20good%20molecular%20clock&author=G%20Pesole&author=MP%20Bozzetti&author=C%20Lanave&author=G%20Preparata&author=C%20Saccone&volume=88&publication_year=1991&pages=522-526&pmid=1671172&doi=10.1073/pnas.88.2.522&)\]
37.  Pfaffl MW. A new mathematical model for relative quantification in real-time RT-PCR. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001;29:e45. doi: 10.1093/nar/29.9.e45. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/29.9.e45)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC55695/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11328886/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nucleic%20Acids%20Res&title=A%20new%20mathematical%20model%20for%20relative%20quantification%20in%20real-time%20RT-PCR&author=MW%20Pfaffl&volume=29&publication_year=2001&pages=e45&pmid=11328886&doi=10.1093/nar/29.9.e45&)\]
38.  Rikihisa Y. Mechanisms of obligatory intracellular infection with Anaplasma phagocytophilum. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2011;24:469–489. doi: 10.1128/CMR.00064-10. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1128/CMR.00064-10)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3131063/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21734244/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Clin%20Microbiol%20Rev&title=Mechanisms%20of%20obligatory%20intracellular%20infection%20with%20Anaplasma%20phagocytophilum&author=Y%20Rikihisa&volume=24&publication_year=2011&pages=469-489&pmid=21734244&doi=10.1128/CMR.00064-10&)\]
39.  Sanson B, White P, Vincent JP. Uncoupling cadherin-based adhesion from wingless signalling in Drosophila. Nature. 1996;383:627–630. doi: 10.1038/383627a0. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/383627a0)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8857539/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nature&title=Uncoupling%20cadherin-based%20adhesion%20from%20wingless%20signalling%20in%20Drosophila&author=B%20Sanson&author=P%20White&author=JP%20Vincent&volume=383&publication_year=1996&pages=627-630&pmid=8857539&doi=10.1038/383627a0&)\]
40.  Shia AKH, Glittenberg M, Thompson G, Weber AN, Reichhart JM, Ligoxygakis P. Toll-dependent antimicrobial responses in Drosophila larval fat body require Spätzle secreted by haemocytes. Journal of Cell Science. 2009;122:4505–4515. doi: 10.1242/jcs.049155. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.049155)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2787462/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19934223/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Journal%20of%20Cell%20Science&title=Toll-dependent%20antimicrobial%20responses%20in%20Drosophila%20larval%20fat%20body%20require%20Sp%C3%A4tzle%20secreted%20by%20haemocytes&author=AKH%20Shia&author=M%20Glittenberg&author=G%20Thompson&author=AN%20Weber&author=JM%20Reichhart&volume=122&publication_year=2009&pages=4505-4515&pmid=19934223&doi=10.1242/jcs.049155&)\]
41.  Sirigireddy KR, Ganta RR. Multiplex detection of Ehrlichia and Anaplasma species pathogens in peripheral blood by real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. J Mol Diagn. 2005;7:308–316. doi: 10.1016/S1525-1578(10)60559-4. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1525-1578\(10\)60559-4)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1867522/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15858156/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Mol%20Diagn&title=Multiplex%20detection%20of%20Ehrlichia%20and%20Anaplasma%20species%20pathogens%20in%20peripheral%20blood%20by%20real-time%20reverse%20transcriptase-polymerase%20chain%20reaction&author=KR%20Sirigireddy&author=RR%20Ganta&volume=7&publication_year=2005&pages=308-316&pmid=15858156&doi=10.1016/S1525-1578\(10\)60559-4&)\]
42.  Smith RD, Sells DM, Stephenson EH, Ristic MR, Huxsoll DL. Development of Ehrlichia canis, causative agent of canine ehrlichiosis, in the tick Rhipicephalus sanguineus and its differentiation from a symbiotic Rickettsia. Am J Vet Res. 1976;37:119–126. \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/944000/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Vet%20Res&title=Development%20of%20Ehrlichia%20canis,%20causative%20agent%20of%20canine%20ehrlichiosis,%20in%20the%20tick%20Rhipicephalus%20sanguineus%20and%20its%20differentiation%20from%20a%20symbiotic%20Rickettsia&author=RD%20Smith&author=DM%20Sells&author=EH%20Stephenson&author=MR%20Ristic&author=DL%20Huxsoll&volume=37&publication_year=1976&pages=119-126&pmid=944000&)\]
43.  Socolovschi C, Mediannikov O, Raoult D, Parola P. The relationship between spotted fever group Rickettsiae and ixodid ticks. Vet Res. 2009;40:34. doi: 10.1051/vetres/2009017. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1051/vetres/2009017)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2695030/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19358804/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Vet%20Res&title=The%20relationship%20between%20spotted%20fever%20group%20Rickettsiae%20and%20ixodid%20ticks&author=C%20Socolovschi&author=O%20Mediannikov&author=D%20Raoult&author=P%20Parola&volume=40&publication_year=2009&pages=34&pmid=19358804&doi=10.1051/vetres/2009017&)\]
44.  Sotomayor EA, Popov VL, Feng HM, Walker DH, Olano JP. Animal model of fatal human monocytotropic ehrlichiosis. Am J Pathol. 2001;158:757–769. doi: 10.1016/S0002-9440(10)64018-7. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0002-9440\(10\)64018-7)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1850300/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11159213/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Am%20J%20Pathol&title=Animal%20model%20of%20fatal%20human%20monocytotropic%20ehrlichiosis&author=EA%20Sotomayor&author=VL%20Popov&author=HM%20Feng&author=DH%20Walker&author=JP%20Olano&volume=158&publication_year=2001&pages=757-769&pmid=11159213&doi=10.1016/S0002-9440\(10\)64018-7&)\]
45.  Ullmann AJ, Lima CM, Guerrero FD, Piesman J, Black WC., 4th Genome size and organization in the blacklegged tick, Ixodes scapularis and the Southern cattle tick, Boophilus microplus. Insect Mol Biol. 2005;14:217–222. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2583.2005.00551.x. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2583.2005.00551.x)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15796755/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Insect%20Mol%20Biol&title=Genome%20size%20and%20organization%20in%20the%20blacklegged%20tick,%20Ixodes%20scapularis%20and%20the%20Southern%20cattle%20tick,%20Boophilus%20microplus&author=AJ%20Ullmann&author=CM%20Lima&author=FD%20Guerrero&author=J%20Piesman&author=WC%20Black&volume=14&publication_year=2005&pages=217-222&pmid=15796755&doi=10.1111/j.1365-2583.2005.00551.x&)\]
46.  Varela-Stokes AS. Transmission of Ehrlichia chaffeensis from lone star ticks (Amblyomma americanum) to white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus) J Wildl Dis. 2007;43:376–381. doi: 10.7589/0090-3558-43.3.376. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.7589/0090-3558-43.3.376)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17699076/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J%20Wildl%20Dis&title=Transmission%20of%20Ehrlichia%20chaffeensis%20from%20lone%20star%20ticks%20\(Amblyomma%20americanum\)%20to%20white-tailed%20deer%20\(Odocoileus%20virginianus\)&author=AS%20Varela-Stokes&volume=43&publication_year=2007&pages=376-381&pmid=17699076&doi=10.7589/0090-3558-43.3.376&)\]
47.  Von Ohlen T, Luce-Fedrow A, Ortega MT, Ganta RR, Chapes SK. Identification of critical host mitochondrial-associated genes during Ehrlichia chaffeensis infections. Infect Immun. 2012;80:3576–3586. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00670-12. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1128/IAI.00670-12)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3457586/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22851751/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Infect%20Immun&title=Identification%20of%20critical%20host%20mitochondrial-associated%20genes%20during%20Ehrlichia%20chaffeensis%20infections&author=T%20Von%20Ohlen&author=A%20Luce-Fedrow&author=MT%20Ortega&author=RR%20Ganta&author=SK%20Chapes&volume=80&publication_year=2012&pages=3576-3586&pmid=22851751&doi=10.1128/IAI.00670-12&)\]
48.  Von Ohlen T, Moses C, Poulson W. Ind represses msh expression in the intermediate column of the Drosophila neuroectoderm, through direct interaction with upstream regulatory DNA. Developmental Dynamics. 2009;238:2735–2744. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22096. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/dvdy.22096)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2995376/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19795518/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Developmental%20Dynamics&title=Ind%20represses%20msh%20expression%20in%20the%20intermediate%20column%20of%20the%20Drosophila%20neuroectoderm,%20through%20direct%20interaction%20with%20upstream%20regulatory%20DNA&author=T%20Von%20Ohlen&author=C%20Moses&author=W%20Poulson&volume=238&publication_year=2009&pages=2735-2744&pmid=19795518&doi=10.1002/dvdy.22096&)\]
49.  Vonkavaara M, Telepnev MV, Ryden P, Sjöstedt A, Stöven S. Drosophila melanogaster as a model for elucidating the pathogenicity of Francisella tularensis. Cell Microbiol. 2008;10:1327–1338. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2008.01129.x. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1462-5822.2008.01129.x)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18248629/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell%20Microbiol&title=Drosophila%20melanogaster%20as%20a%20model%20for%20elucidating%20the%20pathogenicity%20of%20Francisella%20tularensis&author=M%20Vonkavaara&author=MV%20Telepnev&author=P%20Ryden&author=A%20Sj%C3%B6stedt&author=S%20St%C3%B6ven&volume=10&publication_year=2008&pages=1327-1338&pmid=18248629&doi=10.1111/j.1462-5822.2008.01129.x&)\]
50.  Yu DH, Li YH, Yoon JS, Lee JH, Lee MJ, Yu IJ, Chae JS, Park JH. Ehrlichia chaffeensis infection in dogs in South Korea. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis. 2008;8:355–358. doi: 10.1089/vbz.2007.0226. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1089/vbz.2007.0226)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18399775/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Vector%20Borne%20Zoonotic%20Dis&title=Ehrlichia%20chaffeensis%20infection%20in%20dogs%20in%20South%20Korea&author=DH%20Yu&author=YH%20Li&author=JS%20Yoon&author=JH%20Lee&author=MJ%20Lee&volume=8&publication_year=2008&pages=355-358&pmid=18399775&doi=10.1089/vbz.2007.0226&)\]