---
title: "Mechanosensing antagonizes ethylene signaling to promote root gravitropism in rice"
authors: ["Han-Qing Wang", "Xing-Yu Zhao", "Zhong Tang", "Xin-Yuan Huang", "Peng Wang", "Wenhua Zhang", "Yunhui Zhang", "Sheng Luan", "Fang-Jie Zhao"]
journal: "Nature Communications"
date: "2025 Apr 19"
doi: "10.1038/s41467-025-59047-z"
source_url: "https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC12008199/"
---

# Mechanosensing antagonizes ethylene signaling to promote root gravitropism in rice

*Nature Communications*, 2025 Apr 19, [doi:10.1038/s41467-025-59047-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-59047-z)

### Han-Qing Wang
### Xing-Yu Zhao
### Zhong Tang
### Xin-Yuan Huang
### Peng Wang
### Wenhua Zhang
### Yunhui Zhang
### Sheng Luan
### Fang-Jie Zhao

## Abstract

Root gravitropism relies on gravity perception by the root cap and requires tightly regulated phytohormone signaling. Here, we isolate a rice mutant that displays root coiling in hydroponics but normal gravitropic growth in soil. We identify _COILING ROOT IN WATER 1_ (_CRW1_) encoding an ETHYLENE-INSENSITIVE3 (EIN3)-BINDING F-BOX PROTEIN (OsEBF1) as the causative gene for the mutant phenotype. We show that the OsCRW1-EIN3 LIKE 1 and 2 (OsEIL1/2)-ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR 82 (OsERF82) module controls the production of reactive oxygen species in the root tip, subsequently impacting root cap stability, polar localization of PIN-FORMED 2 (OsPIN2), symmetric distribution of auxin, and ultimately gravitropic growth of roots. The OsEIL1/2-OsERF82 ethylene signaling module is effectively impeded by applying gentle mechanical resistance to root tips, including growing in water-saturated paddy soil. We further show that mechanosensing-induced calcium signaling is required and sufficient for antagonizing the ethylene signaling pathway. This study has revealed previously unanticipated interplay among ethylene, auxin, and mechanosensing in the control of plant gravitropism.

**Subject terms:** Plant signalling, Tropism, Plant hormones

* * *

This study demonstrated that amplified ethylene signaling impairs gravitropic growth of rice roots by affecting root cap stability and OsPIN2 polar localization, whereas mechanosensing-induced calcium signaling antagonizes ethylene signaling to safeguard gravitropism.

## Introduction

The terrestrial colonization of plants is a critical milestone in the Earth’s evolution history, dramatically increasing the productivity of organic carbon on land to support highly diverse ecosystems[1](#CR1),[2](#CR2). The emergence of roots with a gravitropic growth pattern is a critical evolution for land plants, enabling them to anchor in the soil and absorb water and nutrients[3](#CR3). Root gravitropism features perception of gravity by the root cap and directional growth regulation mediated by auxin[4](#CR4). In gravity-oriented roots, symmetrical distribution of auxin in root tips maintain symmetrical growth[5](#CR5). When root growth deviates from the direction of gravity, the amyloplasts in the columella cells of the root cap rapidly sink to the plasma membrane at the bottom, triggering the activation of gravity response via LAZY proteins[6](#CR6),[7](#CR7). Such response entails relocation of the auxin exporter PIN-FORMED (PIN) in the cells and redistribution of auxin[8](#CR8)–[10](#CR10), thus promoting asymmetric auxin flow and asymmetric cell growth to bend the root tip to the gravity direction[11](#CR11). Mutations in auxin transporters and gravity-signaling-related proteins often lead to defective root gravitropism during vertical growth, such as root tips growing toward random directions[7](#CR7),[12](#CR12),[13](#CR13), wavy roots[14](#CR14), and enlarged root angles[15](#CR15),[16](#CR16).

The gaseous plant hormone ethylene plays crucial roles in plant development, senescence, and stress resistance[17](#CR17),[18](#CR18). Ethylene biosynthesis and signaling are induced by specific conditions or stresses, including flooding, drought, low temperatures, and pathogens[18](#CR18). Ethylene signaling pathway starts with ethylene receptors in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane[19](#CR19)–[21](#CR21) and ends with gene regulation in the nucleus[22](#CR22)–[24](#CR24). In the nucleus, the core ethylene response transcription factors ETHYLENE INSENSITIVE3 (EIN3)/ EIN3-Like proteins (EILs) activate the transcription of specific downstream genes in response to ethylene-inducing stress events[25](#CR25),[26](#CR26). When the stress signal fades and the ethylene level goes down, EIN3/EILs are degraded by the EIN3-BINDING F-box protein 1/2 (EBF1/2) mediated ubiquitination/proteasome pathway[27](#CR27),[28](#CR28).

Although ethylene is indispensable for plants, high level of ethylene is adverse for root growth[29](#CR29). In compacted soil, diffusion of ethylene away from roots is limited, resulting in the accumulation of ethylene and inhibition of root penetration into the soil[30](#CR30). Ethylene inhibits root elongation by interacting with other plant hormones, such as auxin and abscisic acid[31](#CR31). For example, excess ethylene enhances auxin biosynthesis and promotes Auxin Response Factors (ARFs)-mediated transcriptional regulation to affect cell wall composition, thereby limiting the elongation of root cells[32](#CR32),[33](#CR33). Excess ethylene also weakens root gravitropic response by affecting auxin biosynthesis[34](#CR34),[35](#CR35). In addition, some auxin signaling and transport mutants exhibit both defective gravitropic phenotypes and insensitivity to ethylene[36](#CR36),[37](#CR37). However, the specific mechanism whereby ethylene signaling controls gravitropic growth remains unclear.

In this study, we isolated an intriguing rice mutant that displays root coiling in hydroponic culture but normal gravitropic growth in soil. The mutated gene represents a loss-of-function allele for the EIN3-binding F-box protein OsCRW1/OsEBF1, leading to overaccumulation of the OsEIL1 and OsEIL2 and amplified ethylene signaling. We show that OsEIL1/2 act on the ethylene response factor OsERF82, which subsequently regulates the transcription of several genes involved in the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Overaccumulation of ROS in the root tip leads to premature loss of the root cap structure, impaired polar localization of OsPIN2 and auxin distribution, resulting in severely impaired gravitropism. In the soil-grown plants, however, gravitropism is restored in a mechanosensing-induced calcium signaling-dependent manner, revealing an intricate regulation of gravitropism by crosstalk between ethylene signaling and mechanosensing.

## Results

### _crw1_ roots coil in water but not in soil

We screened an ethyl methylsulfonate-mutagenized population (approximately 5000 lines) of the rice (_Oryza sativa_ L.) cultivar Zhonghua11 and isolated a mutant with root coiling phenotype when grown in hydroponic culture (Fig. [1a](#Fig1), Supplementary Movie [1](#MOESM3)). Both seminal and adventitious roots of the mutant coiled in the root tip region, resulting in a shorter root depth compared to the wild type (WT, Supplementary Fig. [1](#MOESM1)). Changes in nutrient supply, solution pH, aeration (dissolved oxygen level), and exposure to light did not alter the root coiling phenotype of the mutant in hydroponic culture (Supplementary Fig. [2](#MOESM1)). When grown in water-saturated solid media (e.g. paddy soil, soil-vermiculite mixture, vermiculite and peat pellet), however, the root coiling phenotype disappeared (Fig. [1a](#Fig1) and Supplementary Fig. [3](#MOESM1)). We named the mutant _coiling root in water_ (_crw1_).

In contrast to the distinctive root phenotype, shoots of _crw1_ grew normally in hydroponics (Supplementary Fig. [4a, b](#MOESM1)). Plants were grown to maturity in two paddy fields. In one paddy field, no significant difference was observed between _crw1_ and WT in any of the agronomic traits determined at plant maturity (Supplementary Fig. [4c–h](#MOESM1)), whereas in the other field there was a small and significant reduction in the percentage of filled grains and grain biomass per plant in _crw1_ compared with WT (Supplementary Fig. [4i–n](#MOESM1)).

### _crw1_ exhibits smaller root cap, asymmetric auxin distribution and defective gravitropic response in hydroponic

The coiling phenotype of _crw1_ suggests that it may be a gravitropic mutant. Compared with WT, _crw1_ had a smaller root cap (Fig. [1b](#Fig1)) and fewer amyloplasts in the root tip (Fig. [1c](#Fig1)). When roots were placed horizontally, _crw1_ responded less sensitively to gravity than WT and started to coil at 6 h after horizontal placement (Fig. [1d, e](#Fig1) and Supplementary Fig. [5](#MOESM1)), indicating impaired gravitropic response.

Auxin distribution is crucial for root gravitropism[11](#CR11). To examine the auxin distribution in the root tip, we introduced the auxin reporter _DR5rev::VENUS_ into WT and _crw1_. When grown in water (Fig. [1g](#Fig1)), WT roots showed symmetrical auxin distribution, whereas _crw1_ showed asymmetric auxin distribution at different stages of coiling (Fig. [1g](#Fig1)). When WT roots were placed horizontally, gravity triggered rapid accumulation of auxin on the bottom side of the root tip, causing it to grow towards the gravity direction; once the root tip grew in the gravity direction, symmetrical auxin distribution was restored (Supplementary Fig. [6a](#MOESM1)). In contrast, _crw1_ exhibited an asymmetric auxin distribution at all stages under gravitational stimulation (Supplementary Fig. [6b](#MOESM1)). As expected, asymmetric auxin distribution led to asymmetric cell length on the two sides of the root tip (Supplementary Fig. [7a–c](#MOESM1)). Compared to WT, _crw1_ had a shorter meristem and fewer meristem cells (Supplementary Fig. [7d, e](#MOESM1)). Staining with 5-ethynyl-2-deoxyuridine (EdU) showed a lower proliferation of meristem cells in _crw1_ than WT (Supplementary Fig. [7f, g](#MOESM1)). Applying the auxin biosynthesis inhibitor L-Kynurenine (L-Kyn) or removing the root cap resulted in a more even auxin distribution (indicated by _DR5rev::VENUS_) and rescued the root coiling phenotype of _crw1_ (Supplementary Fig. [8](#MOESM1)).

In _Arabidopsis thaliana_, symmetrical auxin distribution in the root tip is maintained by the auxin exporter PIN2, which is polarly localized on the top of the root epidermal cells to allow the shootward flow of auxin from the root tip[12](#CR12). This pattern of polar localization is conserved in seed plants[3](#CR3). To examine the localization of OsPIN2 in the root tip, we introduced _OsPIN2-GFP_ driven by its native promoter (_pOsPIN2::OsPIN2-GFP_) into WT and _crw1_ by crossing. OsPIN2-GFP was polarly localized in the epidermal cells in WT, whereas such polarity was lost in _crw1_ (Fig. [1h](#Fig1)), which is consistent with the asymmetric auxin distribution observed in _crw1_ root tips.

When grown in soil, all phenotypes of the mutant, including root coiling, root cap size, OsPIN2 polar localization, auxin distribution, and gravity response, were rescued to similar levels observed in WT (Fig. [1a–h](#Fig1) and Supplementary Fig. [5](#MOESM1)). Taken together, these data suggest that the root coiling phenotype of _crw1_ in water is caused by a smaller root cap size with fewer amyloplasts and asymmetric auxin distribution resulted from OsPIN2 mis-localization.

### Cloning the causative gene of _crw1_

To clone the causal gene for the _crw1_ phenotype, we backcrossed WT (paternal) with _crw1_ (maternal). All F1 plants showed the straight-root phenotype in water (Supplementary Fig. [9a](#MOESM1)), and the F2 progeny segregated into 340 and 119 straight and coiling-root, respectively, which is consistent with a 3:1 ratio (χ2 = 0.002, _P_ = 0.966) (Supplementary Fig. [9b](#MOESM1)), indicating that the root coiling phenotype of _crw1_ resulted from recessive mutation of a single gene. We conducted genomic resequencing mapping and Mut-Map analysis on the F2 progeny and identified three candidate genes, _Os06g0604400_, _Os06g0605900_, and _Os06g0619600_ (Supplementary Fig. [9c, d](#MOESM1)). Complementation tests identified _Os06g0605900_ as the causative gene for the mutant phenotype, which we name _COILING ROOT IN WATER 1 (OsCRW1)_ (Fig. [2a–d](#Fig2) and Supplementary Fig. [9e, f](#MOESM1)). Compared to WT, a 3681-bp fragment deletion was identified in the promoter and a portion of the open reading frame of _crw1_ allele, resulting in a total loss of transcription (Fig. [2a, b](#Fig2)). CRISPR/Cas9-mediated knockout of _OsCRW1_ (_oscrw1__KO_) in WT also generated the same root coiling phenotype in water, which disappeared in soil (Fig. [2e, f](#Fig2) and Supplementary Fig. [10a](#MOESM1)). The three _oscrw1__KO_ lines also showed smaller root caps and asymmetric auxin distribution in the root tips when grown in water, and these defective phenotypes were rescued when plants were grown in soil (Supplementary Fig. [10b, c](#MOESM1)).

Analysis of transgenic plants expressing _pOsCRW1::GFP_ and _pOsCRW1::GUS_ showed that _OsCRW1_ was expressed in both roots and shoots (Fig. [2g, h](#Fig2) and Supplementary Fig. [11](#MOESM1)). In roots, _OsCRW1_ was strongly expressed in root tips, especially in the root cap (Fig. [2g, h](#Fig2)). Transient expression of _p35S::GFP-OsCRW1_ in rice protoplasts showed that OsCRW1 was localized in the nucleus (Fig. [2i](#Fig2)).

### Elevated ethylene response in _crw1_ when grown in hydroponic

_OsCRW1_ encodes an F-box domain containing protein (OsEBF1), a homolog of the _Arabidopsis_ EIN3-binding F-box protein 1 (AtEBF1)[27](#CR27),[28](#CR28). Recent studies showed that OsEBF1 and OsEBF2 negatively control ethylene signaling like AtEBF1 and AtEBF2[38](#CR38), and loss of function of OsEBF1 or OsEBF2 led to a hypersensitivity of root and coleoptile to exogenous ethylene[38](#CR38), and a decreased resistance to brown planthopper in rice[39](#CR39),[40](#CR40). To examine whether loss of function of _OsEBF2_ affects gravitropism, we knocked out _OsEBF2_ in the WT background using CRISPR/Cas9. No effect on root growth and gravitropism was found (Supplementary Fig. [12a, b](#MOESM1)). Knockout of _OsEBF2_ in _crw1_ did not exacerbate the root coiling phenotype in water, and also did not affect the phenotype recovery in soil (Supplementary Fig. [12c, d](#MOESM1)), suggesting that OsEBF2, unlike OsCRW1/OsEBF1, does not play a role in root gravitropism.

We performed RNA-seq analysis on WT and _crw1_ roots grown in water or soil. Among the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between _crw1_ and WT grown in water, ethylene-responsive genes were strongly enriched, with 30 of the 32 DEGs being significantly upregulated in _crw1_, including 20 ethylene response transcription factors (ERFs) (Fig. [3a, b](#Fig3)). When grown in soil, the number of DEGs between _crw1_ and WT decreased to 5, with 2 ethylene-related genes being upregulated in _crw1_ compared with WT (Supplementary Fig. [13](#MOESM1)). Application of 1-MCP, an ethylene response inhibitor, totally rescued the phenotypes of smaller root cap, asymmetric auxin distribution and root coiling in _crw1_ and three _oscrw1__KO_ lines in water (Fig. [3c–f](#Fig3)), suggesting that excessive ethylene response leads to the root coiling phenotype.

The above findings support the notion that OsCRW1/OsEBF1 may, like _Arabidopsis_ AtEBF1, function in the degradation of core ethylene response transcription factors[27](#CR27),[28](#CR28). These may include OsEIL1 and OsEIL2 that are rice homologs of AtEIN3/EIL1 (Supplementary Fig. [14a](#MOESM1)), the central transcriptional factors controlling the activation of ethylene signaling and targets of AtEBF1[41](#CR41),[42](#CR42). We investigated whether OsCRW1 interacts with OsEIL1/OsEIL2 proteins. Yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) and bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC) assays showed that OsCRW1 physically interacted with OsEIL1 and OsEIL2 (Supplementary Fig. [14b, c](#MOESM1)). We generated transgenic plants expressing _pOsEIL1::OsEIL1-Flag_ or _pOsEIL2::OsEIL2-Flag_ in WT, and introduced these transgenes into _crw1_ by crossing. Western blot showed that _crw1_ roots accumulated much higher levels of OsEIL1 and OsEIL2 than WT when grown in water, but the differences largely disappeared when grown in soil (Fig. [4a, b](#Fig4)). WT roots grown in water, submerged paddy soil, vermiculite or soil-vermiculite mixture showed similarly low levels of OsEIL1 (Supplementary Fig. [15](#MOESM1)), indicative of similar levels of ethylene in these media. In contrast, WT roots grown in a highly compacted soil (bulk density = 1.6 g cm−3) exhibited an elevated level of OsEIL1, indicating an increased ethylene consistent with the report by Pandey et al.[30](#CR30) Next, we knocked out _OsEIL1_ (_oseil1__KO__/crw1_) or _OsEIL2_ (_oseil2__KO__/crw1_) in _crw1_ by using CRISPR/Cas9 (Supplementary Fig. [14d, e](#MOESM1)), which essentially rescued the root coiling phenotype of _crw1_ in water (Fig. [4c, d](#Fig4)), with the effect being greater in _oseil1__KO__/crw1_ than in _oseil2__KO__/crw1_. These results indicate that loss of function of OsCRW1/OsEBF1 leads to overaccumulation of both OsEIL1 and OsEIL2, causing the root coiling phenotype in water, with OsEIL1 playing a larger role than OsEIL2.

Next, we overexpressed _OsEIL1_ or _OsEIL2_ driven by the maize _Ubiquitin_ promoter, increasing the transcription of the two genes by 16-22- and 52-57-fold, respectively (Supplementary Fig. [16a, b](#MOESM1)). When grown in water, _OsEIL1_ and _OsEIL2_ overexpressing lines showed shorter and slightly curved roots compared with WT (Supplementary Fig. [16c](#MOESM1)). Addition of a small dose of the ethylene precursor ACC (1 μM) in water decreased root growth of WT slightly but caused _OsEIL1_ and _OsEIL2_ overexpressing lines to coil in the root tip region, a phenotype resembling _crw1_ (Supplementary Fig. [16d](#MOESM1)). Overexpression of _OsEIL1_ or _OsEIL2_ alone did not cause root coiling, likely because OsEIL1 or OsEIL2 is degraded in the presence of functional OsCRW1/OsEBF1. In contrast, enhanced ethylene concentration from ACC addition may repress the translation of OsCRW1/OsEBF1 and thus stabilize OsEIL1 and OsEIL2 proteins, as has been shown in _Arabidopsis_[43](#CR43). When grown in soil, the shorter and curvy roots of _OsEIL1_ and _OsEIL2_ overexpressing lines were largely rescued (Supplementary Fig. [16e](#MOESM1)).

### OsEIL1 and OsEIL2 act on the ethylene response factor OsERF82

To search for the direct target genes downstream of OsEIL1 and OsEIL2 that cause root coiling in _crw1_, we analyzed the expression pattern of all of the 139 _ERF_ genes from the transcriptomic data. We expected that the transcriptional levels of the target genes should match the phenotype changes, i.e. elevated in _crw1_ only in water but reduced in soil. When grown in water, 20 _ERF_ genes were expressed at higher levels in _crw1_ roots than WT (Supplementary Fig. [17a](#MOESM1)). When grown in soil, 17 of these 20 _ERF_ genes were equally highly expressed in both WT and _crw1_ (Supplementary Fig. [17b](#MOESM1)), suggesting that these 17 _ERF_ genes may not be related to the root coiling phenotype of _crw1_. The three remaining _ERF_ genes, _OsERF2_ (_Os06g0181700_), _OsERF81_ (_Os02g0520000_) and _OsERF82_ (_Os04g0399800_) were significantly downregulated in both WT and _crw1_ when grown in soil (Supplementary Fig. [17b](#MOESM1)). These _ERF_ genes are potential candidate genes targeted by OsEIL1 and OsEIL2 and associated with the occurrence of the root coiling phenotype (Supplementary Fig. [17b, c](#MOESM1) and Fig. [4e](#Fig4)). We used CRISPR/Cas9 to knock out the three _ERF_ genes individually in the _crw1_ background (Supplementary Fig. [17d–f](#MOESM1)) and found that disruption of _OsERF82_ (_oserf82__KO__/crw1_) rescued the root coiling phenotype of _crw1_ in water to a large extent (Fig. [4f, g](#Fig4)), whereas knockout of _OsERF2_ or _OsERF81_ had no effect (Supplementary Fig. [17g, h](#MOESM1)). The OsERF82 protein was localized in the nucleus and exhibited transactivation activity (Supplementary Fig. [18a, b](#MOESM1)). We used yeast one-hybrid (Y1H) and electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) to demonstrate that OsEIL1 and OsEIL2 could specifically bind to the EIN3-binding sites (EBS, ATGTA) in the promoter region (2.5 Kb) of _OsERF82_ (Fig. [4h–j](#Fig4) and Supplementary Fig. [18c](#MOESM1)). Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-qPCR of _pOsEIL1::OsEIL1-Flag/crw1_ and _pOsEIL2::OsEIL2-Flag/crw1_ transgenic plants showed that OsEIL1 and OsEIL2 bound to the EBS sequences in the OsERF82 promoter in vivo (Fig. [4k, l](#Fig4)). Furthermore, knockout of _OsEIL1_ or _OsEIL2_ in _crw1_ largely abolished the upregulation of _OsERF82_ expression when grown in water (Fig. [4m](#Fig4)). Taken together, the transcription factor OsERF82 acts as a direct target of OsEIL1 and OsEIL2 to amplify ethylene signaling and cause root coiling of _crw1_ in water. The complete rescue of the _crw1_ phenotype in _oseil1/crw1_ but the incomplete rescue in _oserf82__KO__/crw1_ suggests that other target genes regulated by OsEIL1 may also be involved.

### OsEIL1/OsEIL2-OsERF82-ROS nexus controls gravitropism

In addition to the ethylene signaling pathway, RNA-seq showed that genes related to production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) were also enriched in _crw1_ when grown in water but not in soil (Fig. [3a](#Fig3) and Supplementary Fig. [19a](#MOESM1)), suggesting that ROS may be involved in the root coiling phenotype. Among the DEGs between _crw1_ and WT, a ROS-responsive gene _Bsr-d1/ZFP36_, a respiratory burst oxidase homolog enzyme gene (_RBOHH_) and four class III peroxidase genes were upregulated in _crw1_ (Supplementary Fig. [19b](#MOESM1)). It has been shown OsRBOHH is involved in ROS production in rice roots[44](#CR44). The Class III peroxidases are also possibly involved in ROS production in multiple and functionally redundant ways[45](#CR45). To examine whether ROS is involved in the root coiling phenotype, we used the ROS fluorescent probe H2DCFDA to monitor root ROS levels in WT and _crw1_ grown in water. Compared with WT, the ROS level in the root tips of _crw1_ was elevated dramatically, especially in the coiling region and the sloughing root cap cells (Fig. [5a](#Fig5)). Aeration of hydroponic solution had no effect on the ROS level in _crw1_ (Supplementary Fig. [20](#MOESM1)). When grown in soil or vermiculite, ROS in _crw1_ roots returned to a low level comparable to that in WT, corresponding to the recovery of the root phenotype (Supplementary Fig. [19c, d](#MOESM1)). Increased programmed cell death was observed in the root cap cells of _crw1_ grown in water by the TUNEL assay (Fig. [5b](#Fig5)), which was likely induced by excess ROS[46](#CR46) and explained why _crw1_ had a smaller root cap than WT. Application of the ROS scavenger N-acetylcysteine (NAC, 200 μM), the RBOH inhibitor diphenyleneiodonium (DPI, 50 nM), or the inhibitor of the class III peroxidase salicylhydroxamic acid (SHAM, 10 μM) in water reduced ROS in _crw1_ roots to the level comparable to that in WT (Fig. [5a](#Fig5) and Supplementary Fig. [19e, f](#MOESM1)), prevented the excessive programmed cell death and sloughing of the root cap cells, and largely rescued the root coiling phenotype (Fig. [5b, c](#Fig5) and Supplementary Fig. [19g, h](#MOESM1)). Furthermore, clearance of ROS restored the polar localization of OsPIN2 and symmetric distribution of auxin in the root tips of _crw1_ (Fig. [5d, e](#Fig5)). Taken together, these data suggest that enhanced ROS generation, likely by RBOHs and PRXs, causes root coiling in _crw1_ by accelerating sloughing of root cap cells and impairing OsPIN2 localization.

To establish the causal relationship between excess ROS and the amplified OsEIL1/2-OsERF82 module in _crw1_ roots, we grew WT, _crw1_, _oseil1__KO__/crw1_ lines, _oseil2__KO__/crw1_ lines, and _oserf82__KO__/crw1_ lines in water and examined the ROS level in root tips. Knockout of _OsEIL1_, _OsEIL2_, or _OsERF82_ in _crw1_ decreased ROS to a similar level as in WT (Fig. [5f–h](#Fig5)), suggesting that the amplified OsEIL1/2-OsERF82 module in _crw1_ leads to excessive ROS generation in the root tip. To explore how enhanced OsERF82 promotes ROS production, we found that the promoter regions (approximately 3 Kb) of _OsRBOHH_ and three Class III _OsPRX_ genes (Os09g0323700, Os06g0695400 and Os07g0638600) contain potential ERF binding sites, including DRE/CRT (GCCGAC), GCC-box (GCCGCC) and G-box (CACGTG)[47](#CR47) (Supplementary Fig. [21a](#MOESM1)). The Yeast one-hybrid (Y1H) and electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) demonstrated that OsERF82 specifically bound to the binding sites of the DRE/CRT, GCC-box and G-box in the promoter region of _OsRBOHH_ and three Class III _OsPRX_ genes (Supplementary Fig. [21b, c](#MOESM1)). Quantitative PCR showed that the transcriptional levels of _OsRBOHH_ and the three Class III _OsPRX_ genes were upregulated in _crw1_ root tips compared with those in WT (Supplementary Fig. [21d](#MOESM1)), whereas knockout of _OsEIL1_, _OsEIL2_ or _OsERF82_ in _crw1_ suppressed the upregulation of these genes (Supplementary Fig. [21d](#MOESM1)). Taken together, amplified OsEIL1/2-OsERF82 causes ROS accumulation in _crw1_ root tips likely by promoting the transcription of _OsRBOHH_ and Class III _OsPRX_ genes.

### Mechanical resistance on the root tip rescued the root coiling phenotype of _crw1_

After identifying amplified ethylene signaling module of OsEIL1/2-OsERF82 leading to ROS overproduction as the cause of impaired gravitropism in _crw1_, we explored the mechanism underlying the rescue of the root coiling phenotype in _crw1_ when plants were grown in water-saturated paddy soil and other solid media (Supplementary Fig. [3](#MOESM1)). These solid media were soft and had a penetration resistance of 35-67 Pa (Supplementary Fig. [3a](#MOESM1)), which is 25-47 folds smaller than that in the same paddy soil unsaturated with water (moisture content 20%) and compacted to a bulk density of 1.6 g cm−3 (i.e. a condition similar to that used in the study of Pandey et al.[30](#CR30)). To test the strength of mechanical resistance required to rescue the _crw1_ phenotype, we grew the mutant and WT in agar-solidified medium varying in the hardness by adding different amounts of agar (0.3 – 1.2%, mass/volume). _crw1_ showed root coiling in 0.3% and 0.4% agar media (penetration resistance 1 - 6 Pa) just as in water or nutrient solution (Supplementary Fig. [2b](#MOESM1)), curvy roots in 0.6% agar (penetration resistance 19 Pa), and normal straight roots in 0.8 – 1.2% agar (penetration resistance 34 – 77 Pa) (Fig. [6a–c](#Fig6)). Similar phenotypic responses to different concentrations of agar (0.4%, 0.8% and 1.2%) were observed when _crw1_ plants were grown on the surface of vertical agar plates tilted at a 10° angle to allow the root tips in contact with varying degrees of mechanical resistance (Supplementary Fig. [22](#MOESM1)). These results suggest that a gentle mechanical resistance of ≥ 34 Pa is sufficient to rescue the root coiling phenotype of _crw1_.

To further examine the effect of mechanical resistance, we attached a polystyrene foam pellet (1-mm diameter) to the root tip of _crw1_ grown in water, which applied a mechanical stimulus to the root tip through the buoyance of water against the foam pellet (Fig. [6d](#Fig6)). The pellet was open at the top to allow normal gas diffusion. The resistance of the foam pellet to the root tip was estimated to be approximately 104 Pa (Supplementary Fig. [23](#MOESM1)). The attachment of foam pellet did not affect the root cap size and symmetric auxin distribution in WT, but largely rescued the root cap size, auxin distribution and the root coiling phenotype of _crw1_ (Supplementary Fig. [24](#MOESM1) and Fig. [6e, f](#Fig6)), indicating that the root tip is the site for sensing mechanical stimulus which rescues the loss of gravitropism in _crw1_.

Soil compaction may restrict ethylene diffusion away from plant roots, thus amplifying ethylene signaling and inhibiting root growth[30](#CR30). We compared root growth of WT and _crw1_ in a paddy soil packed at a normal (1.0 g cm−3) and a high (1.6 g cm−3) bulk density. Both levels of bulk density restored the coiling root phenotype of _crw1_ to straight roots. At 1.0 bulk density, WT, _crw1_ and two _oscrw1__KO_ mutants showed similar root length (Supplementary Fig. [25](#MOESM1)). Increasing bulk density to 1.6 decreased the root length of WT by 36% and of _crw1_ and two _oscrw1__KO_ mutants by 47-51% (Supplementary Fig. [25](#MOESM1)). The larger inhibition in _crw1_ is consistent with the heightened ethylene signaling.

### Mechanosensing rescuing _crw1_ phenotype requires calcium signaling in the root cap

Calcium (Ca2+) is a critical signal in plant responses to mechanical stimuli[48](#CR48),[49](#CR49). To investigate whether Ca2+ signaling is involved in the rescue of the root coiling phenotype in _crw1_, we expressed _NES-YC3.6_[50](#CR50), a cytosolic Ca2+ (\[Ca2+\]cyt) reporter gene, driven by the maize _Ubiquitin_ promoter in WT and then introduced the gene into _crw1_ through crossing. The root caps of both WT and _crw1_ growing in four different solid media showed a significantly higher \[Ca2+\]cyt signal than those growing in water, and there were no significant differences between WT and _crw1_ (Fig. [7a, b](#Fig7)). Similarly, the \[Ca2+\]cyt signal remained low in the root caps of both WT and _crw1_ when grown in 0.3% and 0.4% agar, and increased significantly when both were grown in 0.8-1.2% agar (Supplementary Fig. [26](#MOESM1)). These results suggest that a gentle mechanical resistance of approximately ≥ 34 Pa enhances \[Ca2+\]cyt in the root cap and beyond this threshold there is no further increase in \[Ca2+\]cyt. Moreover, loss of function of OsCRW1/OsEBF1 does not affect \[Ca2+\]cyt in the root cap or its response to mechanical resistance.

To investigate whether the enhanced Ca2+ signal in the root cap is involved in the recovery of _crw1_’s phenotypes, we applied 100 μM LaCl3, a Ca2+ channel blocker, to 0.8% agar. We found that LaCl3 suppressed \[Ca2+\]cyt in the root caps (Fig. [7c, d](#Fig7)) and largely abolished the rescue effect of mechanical resistance on the root cap size and auxin distribution (Fig. [7e, f](#Fig7)). Importantly, the addition of LaCl3 abolished the recovery of the root coiling phenotype in _crw1_ grown in 0.8-1.2% agar (Fig. [7g](#Fig7) and Supplementary Fig. [27](#MOESM1)), indicating the root cap calcium signal triggered by mechanosensing is required for the rescue of gravitropism in _crw1_.

The observation that growing in soil prevented overaccumulation of OsEIL1 and OsEIL2 in _crw1_ roots (Fig. [4a, b](#Fig4)) suggests that mechanosensing-Ca2+ signaling may rescue the root coiling phenotype of _crw1_ by limiting the accumulation of OsEIL1 and OsEIL2. Western blot showed that _crw1_ roots accumulated OsEIL1 and OsEIL2 when grown in 0.4% agar, and accumulation of the two proteins was suppressed to the WT levels when grown in 0.8% agar (Fig. [7h, i](#Fig7)). Addition of 100 μM LaCl3 to 0.8% agar suppressed \[Ca2+\]cyt in the root caps, resulting in an over-accumulation of OsEIL1 and OsEIL2 in the _crw1_ roots (Fig. [7h, i](#Fig7)). There were no significant differences in the transcript levels of _OsEIL1_ and _OsEIL2_ between WT and _crw1_ in different agar concentrations or between 0.8% agar with and without addition of LaCl3 (Supplementary Fig. [28](#MOESM1)), suggesting that the effect of mechanosensing-induced Ca2+ signaling on the protein levels of OsEIL1 and OsEIL2 is not related to transcriptional regulation of _OsEIL1_ and _OsEIL2_. Furthermore, upregulation of _OsERF82_ and excess ROS production in _crw1_ roots were observed when grown in 0.4% agar but not in 0.8% agar, whereas the addition of LaCl3 to 0.8% agar medium significantly increased _OsERF82_ transcription and ROS accumulation in _crw1_ roots (Fig. [7j](#Fig7) and Supplementary Fig. [29](#MOESM1)). In WT roots, OsEIL1 and OsEIL2 proteins were kept at low levels because of the presence of OsCRW1, which likely explains the lack of response of _OsERF82_ transcription and ROS level to mechano-sensing induced Ca2+ signaling in WT. These results suggest that mechano-sensing induced Ca2+ signaling inhibits the amplified module of OsEIL1/OsEIL2-OsERF82-ROS in _crw1_, and rescues the root cap structure, OsPIN2 polar localization, auxin distribution, and consequently gravitropism.

### The root coiling phenotype in hydroponics occurs in natural rice accessions

Rice roots show considerable natural variation in the growth phenotype when grown in hydroponics. During the screen of a panel of 230 rice accessions consisting mainly of landraces in the lower Yangtze River delta in China, we found that 53, 46 and 131 accessions exhibited the root coiling, straight root, and intermediate phenotypes, respectively, when grown in water (Supplementary Fig. [30a](#MOESM1)). We randomly selected 8 accessions each with coiling or straight roots (Supplementary Fig. [30b, c](#MOESM1)). Quantitative PCR showed that the group of root coiling accessions had a significantly lower level of _OsCRW1_ transcript than the group with straight roots (Supplementary Fig. [30d](#MOESM1)). Addition of 1-MCP to water straightened the coiling roots (Supplementary Fig. [30e](#MOESM1)), suggesting the phenotype in these rice accessions is likely caused by enhanced ethylene signaling. When grown in water-saturated paddy soil, the root coiling phenotype was completely rescued (Supplementary Fig. [30f](#MOESM1)), which is consistent with the phenotype recovery of _crw1_. In highly compacted soil, coiling-root accessions showed shorter root elongation than straight-root accessions, which is consistent with the phenotypes of _crw1_ and WT, respectively (Supplementary Fig. [30g](#MOESM1)).

## Discussion

Ethylene plays a critical role in plant growth, development and resistance to multiple biotic and abiotic stresses. Because ethylene biosynthesis fluctuates widely under the influence of changing environments[18](#CR18),[51](#CR51), its effect on gravitropic growth of roots must be tightly regulated. In this study, by dissecting the genetic basis for the root coiling phenotype in the rice mutant _crw1_, we uncovered the molecular module of OsCRW1 (OsEBF1)-OsEIL1/OsEIL2-OsERF82-ROS that connects ethylene signaling to gravitropism in rice roots (Fig. [8](#Fig8)). Furthermore, by addressing why growing in soft solid media rescued root coiling phenotype of _crw1_, we discovered an unexpected role of root cap mechanosensing in limiting excessive ethylene signaling, thereby safeguarding gravitropic growth of rice roots (Fig. [8](#Fig8)).

The gravitropic growth of roots depends on the perception of gravity by the root cap and the symmetric distribution of auxin in the root tip. The former requires amyloplast as the gravity responder to transmit the gravity signal via LAZY proteins[6](#CR6),[7](#CR7), and the latter is tightly controlled by polar-localized auxin transporters such as PIN2[12](#CR12). Mutations of critical genes in auxin transport (e.g. _pin2_[12](#CR12), _aux1_[13](#CR13), _eir1_[36](#CR36)), amyloplast synthesis[52](#CR52),[53](#CR53) and gravity signaling[6](#CR6),[7](#CR7) cause plant roots to display defective gravitropic behaviors during vertical growth. The impact of ethylene signaling on root gravitropism appears to vary among plant species. In _Arabidopsis_, loss-of-function mutations of the key genes that control ethylene biosynthesis or signal transduction, including _ETO1_, _CTR1, EIN2,_ and _EIN3_, did not affect gravitropic growth of roots[35](#CR35). In contrast, disruption of _EIL1_ and _EIN2_ homologous genes in rice or maize resulted in enlarged angle of adventitious roots when grown in hydroponic, indicating a weakened gravitropism[35](#CR35). In the present study, we found that loss of function of OsCRW1/OsEBF1 led to coiling of both seminal and adventitious roots of rice in hydroponic culture, indicative of a severe disruption of gravitropism. The F-box proteins EBFs bind to EIN3 and EIL proteins, thus promoting their degradation via a ubiquitin/proteasome pathway[27](#CR27),[28](#CR28). The loss of function of OsCRW1/OsEBF1 led to overaccumulation of OsEIL1/2 proteins in rice roots and consequently amplified ethylene signaling. We identified OsERF82, a hitherto unreported ethylene response factor, as the downstream target of OsEIL1/2. OsERF82 transcriptionally regulates the expression of several genes involved in ROS production, including _OsRBOHH_ and several Class III peroxidase genes. The elevated expression of _OsERF82_ in _crw1_ enhanced the expression of these ROS-related genes, resulting in an excessive accumulation of ROS in the root tip. Apart from OsERF82, it is possible that other target genes regulated by OsEIL1 may also play a small role in the coiling root phenotype of _crw1_.

We found that excessive ROS accumulation in the root tip of _crw1_ accelerates root cap sloughing through programed cell death, thereby reducing the number of amyloplast and weakening gravity perception. Furthermore, excessive accumulation of ROS disrupted the symmetrical auxin distribution in the root tip by impairing the polar localization of OsPIN2. This is consistent with an earlier finding that application of exogenous H2O2 inhibits vesicle-mediated trafficking and polar localization of AtPIN2 in _Arabidopsis_[54](#CR54). Disrupted polar localization of OsPIN2 and reduced root cap stability together explain the severe loss of gravitropism in _crw1_ roots. Thus, limiting ethylene signaling in the nucleus is critical for the normal gravitropic growth of rice roots.

Although growing in compacted soil may increase the ethylene level in roots due to restricted gas diffusion[30](#CR30), we found that gentle mechanical resistance that rice roots typically encounter in water-saturated paddy soil or other soft solid media enhances the degradation of OsEIL1/OsEIL2 and thus dampens the excessive ethylene signaling in _crw1_, leading to rescue of the root coiling phenotype. The mechanical resistance required to antagonize ethylene signaling amplification is mild (penetration resistance ≥ 34 Pa), consistent with the soft nature of submerged paddy soil that rice plants are adapted to. This level of mechanical resistance is more than an order of magnitude lower than in water unsaturated and compacted soil used in the study of Pandey et al.[30](#CR30). Strong mechanical resistance can inhibit root elongation or change the direction of root growth. For example, root tips stop growing when encountering three-dimensional impenetrable compactness[30](#CR30), change direction to avoid a flat obstacle[55](#CR55), or grow in a wavy or circular manner on an impenetrable agar slope[56](#CR56)–[58](#CR58). A recent study showed that _Arabidopsis_ roots growing on the agar surface can produce different growth paths in response to subtle changes of mechanical forces[59](#CR59). In the present study, mild mechanical resistance did not affect the normal root growth of WT but was sufficient to ensure gravitropic root growth of _crw1_ and coiling-root accessions, suggesting that mechanical resistance below the level that inhibits root growth can be sensed by rice roots to help safeguard gravitropism. Such an effect has not been reported before but is consistent with previous findings that plants can sensitively perceive different strengths of mechanical stimuli from nature and produce rapid thigmonastic responses or gradual morphogenetic alterations[60](#CR60),[61](#CR61).

We found that the rescue of root gravitropism in _crw1_ by gentle mechanical resistance requires Ca2+signaling in the root cap. In the absence of OsCRW1/OsEBF1, mechanosensing-induced Ca2+signaling safeguards the gravitropic growth of _crw1_ roots by suppressing the accumulation of OsEIL1 and OsEIL2. How enhanced Ca2+ signaling in the root cap prevents over-accumulation of OsEIL1 and OsEIL2 remains unclear and warrants further investigation. The observation that knockout of _OsEBF2_ in _crw1_ did not affect the rescue of the root coiling phenotype by gentle mechanical resistance suggests that enhanced Ca2+signaling promotes the degradation of OsEIL1 and OsEIL2 proteins in an OsCRW1/OsEBF1 and OsEBF2-independent mechanism. Mechanosensing-induced Ca2+signaling may play a particularly important role in keeping ethylene signaling in check under stress conditions, which suppress the translation of OsCRW1/OsEBF1[43](#CR43), or in natural rice accessions with a weak or loss-of-function OsCRW1. On the other hand, although OsCRW1 may be dispensable in uncompacted soil, it is needed to restrict excessive ethylene signaling in compacted soil to reduce the inhibition on root growth.

Interestingly, we observed that the root coiling phenotype was present in some natural rice accessions when grown in hydroponics, and the phenotype was apparently related to the transcription level of _OsCRW1/OsEBF1_. Some of the coiling-root accessions had a _OsCRW1/OsEBF1_ transcript level similar to those in the straight-root accessions, suggesting that variation in the protein level or in the coding sequence may also be involved. Growing these rice accessions in soft paddy soil also restored their gravitropic growth. A lower level of OsCRW1/OsEBF1 may be advantageous for stress resistance because of enhanced ethylene signaling, especially when root gravitropic growth can be safeguarded by mechanosensing. Several stress response pathways were enriched in the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between _crw1_ and WT (Fig. [3b](#Fig3)). Among these DEGs, at least 24 genes that were upregulated in _crw1_ have been previously reported to be involved in the resistance to drought, salinity, cold, or diseases (Supplemental Fig. [31](#MOESM1)). Evolution of land plants is accompanied with expansion of genes involved in hormone signaling and transcription factors[62](#CR62). Our study shows that mechanosensing induced Ca2+ signaling plays an unexpected role in balancing the ethylene-auxin signaling pathways for gravitropic growth of plants in soil.

## Methods

### Plant materials and growth conditions

The japonica rice cultivar Zhonghua11 was used as the wild type (WT) for all experiments. An ethyl methylsulfonate (EMS)-mutagenized population (M3 generation) was used for root phenotype screening. Transgenic plant materials were generated as described below. Seeds were surface sterilized with 15% NaClO for 30 min, washed with sterilized water, and placed in a 37 °C incubator for 2 days to promote germination. Germinated seeds were transferred to hydroponic boxes, soil culture boxes or agar plates to grow depending on the requirements of different experiments. Experiments were carried out in a growth room with the following conditions: temperature 28 °C ± 0.5 °C, humidity 50%–60%, 12-h photoperiod with a light intensity of 100 mmol of photons m−2 s−1. WT and mutant were also grown in two paddy fields (Nanjing and Sanya) to maturity. Agronomic traits, including plant height, tiller number, percentage of filled grains, 1000-grain weight and grain biomass per plant, were determined at plant maturity.

### Plasmid construction and plant transformation

The CRISPR/Cas9 system[63](#CR63) was used to knock out _OsCRW1_ (_Os06g0605900_) and _OsEBF2_ (_Os02g0200900_) in the Zhonghua11 background and _OsEBF2_, _OsEIL1_ (_Os03g0324200_), _OsEIL2_ (_Os07g0685700_), _OsERF2_ (_Os06g0181700_), _OsERF81_ (_Os02g0520000_), and _OsERF82_ (_Os04g0399800_) in the _crw1_ background. Two 20-bp target sequences were selected from the coding sequence (CDS) of each gene and cloned into two single-guide RNA (sgRNA) expression cassettes of _pYLgRNA-OsU6a_ and _pYLgRNA-OsU6b_ by overlapping PCR, producing _proU6a-T1-sgRNA_ and _proU6b-T2-sgRNA_ fragments, respectively. The two fragments were sequentially cloned into the BsaI site of the _pYLCRISPR-Cas9Pubi-H_ vector to generate the ultimate plasmids. To generate the complementation constructs of _proOsCRW1::OsCRW1_, _proOs06g0604400:: Os06g0604400_ and _proOs06g0619600::Os06g0619600_, we amplified the promoter (1739 bp of _proOsCRW1_, 3 Kb of _proOs06g0604400_ and 3 Kb of _proOs06g0619600_) and the open reading frame (ORF) of _OsCRW1_, _Os06g0604400_ and _Os06g0619600_ from the DNA of Zhonghua11. The promoter and ORF were cloned together by overlapping PCR and introduced into the EcoRI/XbaI site of the _pCAMBIAL1301_ vector. To generate _proOsCRW1::GFP_ constructs, we amplified the promoter of _OsCRW1_ (1739 bp) from the DNA of Zhonghua11and the GFP sequence from the _pUN1301_ vector with addition of the initiation codon. The promoter and GFP sequence were cloned together by overlapping PCR and introduced into the HindIII/SacI site of the _pUN1301_ vector. To generate _pOsCRW1::GUS_ constructs, we amplified the promoter of _OsCRW1_ (1739 bp) from the DNA of Zhonghua11 and introduced _OsCRW1_ promoter into the HindIII/BamHI site of the _p1300_ vector. To generate _proOsEIL1::OsEIL1-Flag_ and _proOsEIL2::OsEIL2-Flag_ constructs, we amplified the promoter (2588 bp of _proOsEIL1_, 2500 bp of _proOsEIL2_) and the full-length CDS (without the stop codon) of _OsEIL1_ and _OsEIL2_ from the DNA and cDNA of Zhonghua11. The promoter and CDS were cloned together by overlapping PCR and introduced into the BamHI/SpeI site of the _pTCK303_ vector. To generate _proUbi::OsEIL1_ (OsEIL1-OX) and _proUbi::OsEIL2_ (OsEIL2-OX) constructs, we amplified the full-length CDS of _OsEIL1_ and _OsEIL2_ from the cDNA of cv. ZH11 and introduced the CDS segments into the BamHI/SacI site of the _pUN1301_ vector. The plasmids were transformed into the callus of Zhonghua11 or _crw1_ using _Agrobacterium_\-mediated transformation[64](#CR64). Transformants were verified by PCR. All primers used in this study are listed in Supplementary Table [1](#MOESM1).

Zhonghua11 expressing _DR5rev::VENUS_[65](#CR65), _proOsPIN2::OsPIN2-GFP_[14](#CR14), or _NES-YC3.6_[65](#CR65) were obtained from previous studies. These genotypes and Zhonghua11 expressing _proOsEIL1::OsEIL1-Flag_ or _proOsEIL2::OsEIL2-Flag_ were crossed with _crw1_ or _oscrw1__KO_ lines (maternal) to obtain the reporter or tag lines in the mutant background by PCR. The F3 seeds were used for experiments.

### Root growth experiments

Germinated seeds were placed on a net floating on deionized water for ten days and then transferred to ½ strength Kimura B nutrient solution[66](#CR66) for different durations according to the requirements of experiments. The nutrient solution was changed every three days, and the pH was maintained at 5.6-5.8. To investigate the effects of nutrients, pH, light and dissolved oxygen level on root phenotypes, we grew seedlings of _crw1_ and WT in hydroponic boxes filled with deionized water or nutrient solution at the ¼ and ½ strength, different solution pH (from 4 to 8), light condition (12 h/12 h light/dark or 24 h dark), with or without aeration treatment (dissolved oxygen level 12.45 and 5.36 mg/L, respectively). To compare the root phenotypes grown in water and solid media, we grew germinated seedlings in water (pH = 5.6-5.8), water-saturated paddy soil, water-saturated vermiculite or water-saturated peat pellet for 2-10 days. Dissolved oxygen concentrations in hydroponic solution and soil were measured using a dissolved oxygen probe. In some experiments, paddy soil was packed at a normal (1.0 g cm−3) and a high (1.6 g cm−3) bulk density. The penetration resistance of soil and other solid growth media was measured by using a soil compactness tester.

To investigate the effect of mechanical resistance on root phenotypes, we grew seedlings of WT and _crw1_ in agar-solidified medium with 0.3, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0 or 1.2% (w/v) agar in square Petri dishes. The top 2-cm agar was removed and the emerged seminal roots (1-2 mm) of WT and _crw1_ were embedded in the agar and allowed to grow vertically for 2 to 3 days. To apply resistance on root tips, we made polystyrene foam spherical pellets (1 mm diameter) with a slit in the middle, placed root tip into the slit and grew seedlings in deionized water for 2-3 days. For chemical treatment, L-Kynurenine (L-Kyn, 10 μM), 1-Methylcyclopropene (1-MCP, 10 μM), 1-Aminocyclopropanecarboxylic Acid (ACC, 1 μM), N-acetylcysteine (NAC, 200 μM), diphenyleneiodonium (DPI, 50 nM), salicylhydroxamic acid (SHAM, 10 μM) or LaCl3 (100 μM) were added to deionized water or agar medium according to different experiments. Each genotype and treatment had at least 3 biological replicates, 7-12 plants per replicate in short-term hydroponic experiments, 3-6 plants per replicate in long-term hydroponic experiments, 3-4 plants per replicate in petri dish experiments, and 7-12 plants per replicate in soil-vermiculite experiments.

### MutMap-based gene cloning

To clone the causal gene responsible for the coiling-root phenotype of _crw1_, we backcrossed _crw1_ to WT (Zhonghua11) to generate F1 progenies. F1 progenies were selfed to generate F2 progenies. DNA was extracted from 50 F2 plants showing the coiling-root phenotype in water and mixed in equal proportions to generate a pooled genomic DNA of _crw1_. A pooled genomic DNA of WT was prepared in the same way. Genome sequencing was performed using Illumina Hiseq4000 at 50× and 30× coverage for _crw1_ and WT, respectively), generating 150-bp paired-end reads. After removing the adapter sequences and low-quality reads, clean reads were mapped to the reference genome sequence (OsNipponbare-Reference-RGAP7, MSU) using BWA software[67](#CR67), followed by SNP-calling using GATK software[68](#CR68). Causative variant were calculated using the MutMap SNP-index method[69](#CR69) and candidate SNPs were identified.

### Tissue expression pattern analysis of _OsCRW1_

Transgenic rice plants expressing _proOsCRW1::GUS_ were grown in water for 3 days before being used for histochemical staining for the GUS activity in roots, and in nutrient solution for different durations for GUS staining of leaves and reproductive organs. Roots and other tissues were incubated with a GUS staining solution for 2 h at 37 °C, transferred to 70% ethanol overnight, and then photographed under an ultra-depth stereoscopic microscope (Leica, DVM6a). Transgenic rice plants expressing _proOsCRW1::GFP_ were grown in water for 3 days and roots were cut and were placed on a slide for fluorescence imaging under a macro zoom microscope (Carl Zeiss, MVX10). The GFP fluorescence was observed at 505-560 nm for emission and 488 nm for excitation.

### Subcellular localization of OsCRW1 and OsERF82

To generate constructs of _GFP-OsCRW1_ or _GFP-OsERF82_ driven by the CaMV35S promoter (_pro35S::GFP-OsCRW1_ or _pro35S::GFP-OsERF82_), we amplified the full-length CDS of _OsCRW1_ or _OsERF82_ from the cDNA of Zhonghua11 and introduced the CDS into the HindIII/EcoRI site of the _pSAT6-GFP-C_ vector. The fragments of _pro35S::GFP-OsCRW1_ or _pro35S::GFP-OsERF82_ were isolated from the _pSAT6-GFP-C_ vector by PI-PspI endonuclease and introduced into the PI-PspI site of the _pRCS2_ vector. The plasmids were transformed into rice protoplasts for transient expression[70](#CR70). Protoplasts were isolated from rice stems and labeled with the nucleus marker 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) for co-localization. The GFP and DAPI fluorescence was observed under a confocal laser-scanning microscope (Carl Zeiss, LSM780) at 505-560 nm and 400-470 nm for emission, respectively, and at 488 nm and 360 nm for excitation, respectively.

### Root cap size observation and amyloplast staining

Root tips from two-day-old seedlings were cut and stained with 0.1% (w/v) basic fuchsin solution for 6 h. Root tips were resin-embedded, sectioned according to a previous method[71](#CR71), and photographed under a microscope to reveal the root cap size. Root tips from two-day-old seedlings were cut, stained with 5% (v/v) Lugol’s solution for 1 minute, washed with distilled water, and photographed under a microscope for the observation of the amyloplasts in the root caps. Lugol’s stock solution was prepared by dissolving 5% (m/v) iodine in 10% (m/v) KI solution.

### Fluorescence imaging of OsPIN2 localization, auxin response, cytosolic Ca2+ and ROS

Plants expressing _proOsPIN2::OsPIN2-GFP_ or the reporter gene for auxin response (_DR5rev::VENUS_) or for cytosolic Ca2+ (_NES-YC3.6_, driven by the maize _Ubiquitin_ promoter) were grown under different growth conditions or treatments for two to three days. Root tips were cut and immediately observed under a confocal laser-scanning microscope. The GFP fluorescence was observed as described above. The VENUS fluorescence was observed at 520-550 nm for emission and 515 nm for excitation. For NES-YC3.6 detection, the measurement of cpVENUS/ECFP ratio shifts was based on fluorescence resonance energy transfer according to a previous method[50](#CR50). The ECFP fluorescence was observed at 460-490 nm for emission and 415 nm for excitation. For detection of ROS, roots were incubated with 10 μM H2DCFDA for 10 mins, washed with deionized water, and the ROS fluorescence was observed under a confocal laser-scanning microscope at 505-560 nm and 488 nm for emission and excitation, respectively[65](#CR65).

### TUNEL assay

The TUNEL assay was used to detect the programed cell death of root caps. Root tips were sampled and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 mins, followed by washing with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Root tips were immersed in PBS containing 0.3% Triton X-100 for 5 mins, washed with PBS, and incubated in the TUNEL detection solution (Beyotime, China) at 37 °C for 1 h. The TUNEL fluorescence was observed under a confocal laser-scanning microscope at 515-565 nm and 488 nm for emission and excitation, respectively.

### Yeast two-hybrid (Y2H)

The Y2H assay was used to detect the interaction between OsCRW1 and OsEIL1 or OsEIL2.The full-length CDS of _OsCRW1_ was introduced into the EcoRI/BamHI site of the _pGBKT7_ vector to generate the _pGBKT7-OsCRW1_ vector expressing fusion proteins containing the yeast GAL4 transcription binding domain (BD). The full-length CDS of _OsEIL1_ or _OsEIL2_ was introduced into the EcoRI/BamHI site of _pGADT7_ to generate the _pGADT7-OsEIL1_ and _pGADT7-EIL2_ vector expressing fusion proteins containing the yeast GAL4 transcription activation domain (AD). The _pGBKT7-OsCRW1_ plasmid and _pGADT7-OsEIL1_ or _pGADT7-OsEIL2_ plasmid were transformed into the Y2H Gold yeast strain alone or in pairs. _pGBKT7-53_ together with _pGADT7-T_ were transformed as a positive control, and _pGBKT7-lam_ together with _pGADT7-T_ were transformed as a negative control. The yeast colonies were cultured in Synthetic Dropout (SD) liquid medium (-Trp, -Leu) to an optical density (OD) of 0.8. The serially diluted yeast solution was inoculated on a double-deficient SD medium (-Trp, -Leu) and a quadruple-deficient SD medium (-Trp, -Leu, -His, -Ade, +X-α-gal) for growth.

### Bimolecular fluorescence complementation

The full-length CDS of _OsCRW1_ was fused to the vector of _pDONR221-P3P2_, and the full-length CDS of _OsEIL1_ and _OsEIL2_ were fused to the vector of _pDONR221-P1P4_ by gateway cloning, and then were transferred into _pBiFCt-2in1-NN_ vector alone or in pairs by LR clonase to fuse with the N- and C-terminal fragments of yellow fluorescent protein (YFP). The final plasmids were introduced into _Agrobacterium tumefaciens_ strain GV3101. Bacterial cultures of the test combinations and controls were infiltrated into tobacco (Latin name) leaves. Two days after infiltration, the YFP signal was detected under confocal laser microscopy at 520-550 nm and 515 nm for emission and excitation, respectively.

### Western blot

For immunological detection of OsEIL1-Flag, OsEIL2-Flag and OsActin in the roots of WT and _crw1_, total soluble proteins were extracted from 15-20 seminal roots with 1 ml plant protein extraction buffer. Proteins were denatured by heating at 95 oC for 10 min in a metal-bath and separated on 12% SDS-PAGE. Subsequently, proteins were transferred onto a polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membrane and immunoblots were probed with the following antibodies in the TBST solution (100 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1%(v/v) Tween 20, pH=7.4) with 5% non-fat dry milk. A mouse anti-Flag antibody (Invitrogen, MA1-91878, 1:5000 dilution) and a mouse anti-Actin antibody (Beyotime, AA128, 1:5000 dilution) were used as the primary antibodies and HPR-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (Beyotime, A0216, 1:5000 dilution) was used as the secondary antibody. Chemiluminescence was performed using ECL Western Blotting Substrate (Beyotime, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Yeast one-hybrid

The full-length CDS of _OsEIL1_, _OsEIL2_ or _OsERF82_ was introduced into the EcoRI/BamHI site of the _pGADT7_ vector to express fusion proteins containing the yeast GAL4 transcription activation domain. To detect the binding of OsEIL1/2 with the EIN3-binding site (EBS, ATGTA) on the promoter of _OsERF82_, we introduced three copies of EBS into the SmaI/SalI site of the _pAbAi_ vector. A random mutation sequence in EBS was designed (EBSmut, CGAGA) and used as a negative control. To detect the binding of OsERF82 with the GCC-box (GCCGCC), G-box (CACGTG) and DRE/CRT (GCCGAC) on the promoter sequence of _OsRBOHH_ and three Class III _OsPRX_ genes, we introduced three copies of DRE/CRT, GCC box and G box sequence into the SmaI/SalI site of the _pAbAi_ vector. A random mutation sequence in each potential binding site was designed (GCC-boxmut, ACCACC; G-boxmut, AACTTG; DRE/CRTmut, GTCGAA) and used as a negative control. _pAbAi_ carrying different binding sites were transformed into Y1H Gold yeast strain to screen the proper concentration of aureobasidin A (AbA) for inhibiting transcriptional self-activation. _pGADT7_ carrying _OsEIL1_ or _OsEIL2_ or _OsERF82_, and _pAbAi_ carrying different sequences were co-transformed into Y1H Gold yeast strain. The yeast colonies were cultured in Leu-deficient SD liquid medium to OD of 0.8. The serially diluted yeast solution was inoculated on Leu-deficient SD medium (with or without AbA) for growth.

### Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA)

The full-length CDS of _OsEIL1_, _OsEIL2_ or _OsERF82_ were introduced into the NdeI/XhoI site of the _pET29a_ vector and transformed into _Escherichia coli_ BL21 to express OsEIL1-His, OsEIL2-His or OsERF82-His fusion protein. OsEIL1-His, OsEIL2-His and OsERF82-His fusion proteins were purified from _E. coli_ by nickel affinity columns. Primers were designed for the EIN3-binding site (EBS, ATGTA) on the promoter sequence of _OsERF82_ or designed for the ERF-binding sites including the GCC box, the G box and the DRE/CRT sequence on the promoter sequence of _OsRBOHH_ and three Class III _OsPRX_ genes to synthesize biotin-labeled probes, unlabeled probes, and unlabeled mutation probes. The protein and probe were incubated with EMSA reaction solution (prepared according to the manufacturer’s protocol, Beyotime, China) for 20 min at room temperature, separated on a 5% polyacrylamide native gel at 4 °C, and transferred to a nylon membrane. After UV light cross-linking, the DNA on the membrane was detected using the Chemiluminescent Nucleic Acid Detection Module. Primers used are listed in Supplementary Table [2](#MOESM1).

### Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)- qPCR assay

The ChIP assay was performed using the BeyoChIP™ ChIP Assay Kit (Beyotime, P2080S, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Plants of _pOsEIL2::OsEIL2-Flag/crw1_ and _pOsEIL2::OsEIL2-Flag/crw1_ were grown in water for two day, and 15-20 roots were collected as one biological replicate, with three biological replicates for each experiment. Root tissue was cross-linked in 1% (v/v) formaldehyde under vacuum. Chromatin was extracted from the samples and fragmented via ultrasound treatment to a size of 200-500 bp, and 2% of the yield was set aside as input template. The OsEIL1-DNA and OsEIL2-DNA complex were coimmunoprecipitated with anti-Flag antibody (Invitrogen, MA1-91878, 1:5000 dilution) and protein A/G beads (Beyotime, P2080S, China), or coimmunoprecipitated with IgG (Beyotime, A7028, China) with protein A/G beads. NaCl (0.2 M) was added to the solution of protein-DNA complex and heated at 65 °C for 4 hours to remove the cross-linking between protein and genomic DNA. According to the manufacturer’s instructions, DNA was extracted with phenol/chloroform agent for DNA purification (Solarbio, T0250, China). Primers (Supplementary Table [3](#MOESM1)) were designed near the three EBS sequences on the _OsERF82_ promoter. Primers and purified DNA were used for ChIP-qPCR.

### Transactivation activity of OsERF82

The full-length CDS of _OsERF82_ was introduced into the EcoRI/BamHI site of the _pGBKT7_ vector to generate the _pGBKT7-OsCRW1_ vector expressing fusion protein containing the yeast GAL4 transcription binding domain (BD). The _pGBKT7-OsERF82_ plasmid was transformed into the AH109 yeast strain. _pGBKT7_ plasmid was transformed as a negative control. The yeast colonies were cultured in Synthetic Dropout (SD) liquid medium (-Trp) to OD = 0.8. The serially diluted yeast solution was inoculated on Trp-deficient SD medium and double-deficient SD medium (-Trp, -His, +X-α-gal) for growth.

### RNA sequencing

RNA sequencing was performed on roots of _crw1_ and WT grown in water or in a soil-vermiculite mixture for two days. Each group contained three replicates with 15-20 plants per replicate. Total RNA was extracted using a Plant Total RNA Extraction Kit (BioTeke). The cDNA libraries were sequenced on the Illumina NovaSeq 6000 sequencing platform at Benagen Technology (Wuhan, China), and 150-bp paired-end reads were generated. For the analysis of gene expression, fragments per kilobase of transcript per million mapped reads and read counts of each unigene were calculated and normalized based on the number of uniquely positioned reads overlapping the exon regions. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified using R software (v.3.5.1) with the DESeq2 package ([http://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/DESeq2.html](http://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/DESeq2.html)).

### RNA extraction and quantitative real-time PCR

Total RNA was extracted using a Plant Total RNA Extraction Kit (BioTeke, Beijing, China). A HiScript II 1st Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Vazyme, Nanjing, China) was used to convert 1 μg of total RNA to 20 μL cDNA. Quantitative real-time PCR was performed on an RT-PCR detection system (CFX96, Bio-Rad) by using SYBR Green Master Mix (Vazyme, Nanjing, China). _OsActin_ and _OsHistone_ were used as the internal reference genes. The expression levels were calculated using the equation 2–Δ(ΔCt). Primers are shown in Supplementary Table [3](#MOESM1).

### Statistics and reproducibility

The experiments performed in this study were repeated independently at least three times with similar results. The data are presented as the mean ± SD and the microscope images presented are the most representative of the results. The significance of the difference between two sets of data was tested by one- or two-sided Student’s t-test using Microsoft Excel 2019. The difference among more than two sets of data was analyzed by one-way or two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s test as post hoc analysis using IBM SPSS Statistics 21.0. No statistical method was used to predetermine sample size. No data were excluded from the analyses. The experiments were not randomized. The Investigators were not blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assessment.

### Reporting summary

Further information on research design is available in the [Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary](#MOESM4) linked to this article.

## Supplementary information

## Source data

## Acknowledgements

We thank Dr. Chuanzao Mao of Zhejiang University for providing seeds of _proOsPIN2::OsPIN2-GFP_ and Dr. Wei Xuan of Nanjing Agricultural University for providing seeds of _DR5rev::VENUS_. This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (42430704) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (YDZX2025047).

## Author contributions

The project was conceptualized by H.-Q.W., F.-J.Z. and S.L.; the methodology was designed by H.-Q.W and F.-J.Z.; the investigation was performed by H.-Q.W., X.-Y.Z. and Z.T.; formal analysis was performed by H.-Q.W. and F.-J.Z.; 230 rice accessions were provided by Y.Z., the research results were discussed by H.-Q.W., F.-J.Z., S.L., W.Z., X.-Y.H., and P.W.; original draft was written by H.-Q.W. and F.-J.Z.; the manuscript was reviewed and edited by S.L. and F.-J.Z; funding acquisition and supervision were by F.-J.Z.

## Peer review

### Peer review information

_Nature Communications_ thanks Haodong Chen and the other, anonymous, reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work. A peer review file is available.

## Data availability

The dataset of ZH11 and _crw1_ genome sequencing generated in this study have been deposited in the NCBI SRA database (NCBI: PRJNA1095451 \[[https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/1095451](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/1095451)\]. The dataset of RNA-seq generated in this study have been deposited in the NCBI SRA database (NCBI: PRJNA1095650) \[[https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/1095650](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/1095650)\]. [Source data](#Sec35) are provided with this paper.

## Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

## Footnotes

**Publisher’s note** Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

## Supplementary information

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41467-025-59047-z.

## References

*   1.Gibling, M. R. & Davies, N. S. Palaeozoic landscapes shaped by plant evolution. _Nat. Geosci._**5**, 99–105 (2012). \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Gibling,%20M.%20R.%20&%20Davies,%20N.%20S.%20Palaeozoic%20landscapes%20shaped%20by%20plant%20evolution.%20Nat.%20Geosci.5,%2099%E2%80%93105%20\(2012\).)\]
*   2.Dolan, L. Body building on land—morphological evolution of land plants. _Curr. Opin. Plant Biol._**12**, 4–8 (2009). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbi.2008.12.001)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19112042/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Dolan,%20L.%20Body%20building%20on%20land%E2%80%94morphological%20evolution%20of%20land%20plants.%20Curr.%20Opin.%20Plant%20Biol.12,%204%E2%80%938%20\(2009\).)\]
*   3.Zhang, Y., Xiao, G., Wang, X., Zhang, X. & Friml, J. Evolution of fast root gravitropism in seed plants. _Nat. Commun._**10**, 3480 (2019). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-11471-8)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6677796/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31375675/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Zhang,%20Y.,%20Xiao,%20G.,%20Wang,%20X.,%20Zhang,%20X.%20&%20Friml,%20J.%20Evolution%20of%20fast%20root%20gravitropism%20in%20seed%20plants.%20Nat.%20Commun.10,%203480%20\(2019\).)\]
*   4.Su, S.-H., Gibbs, N. M., Jancewicz, A. L. & Masson, P. H. Molecular mechanisms of root gravitropism. _Curr. Biol._**27**, R964–R972 (2017). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2017.07.015)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28898669/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Su,%20S.-H.,%20Gibbs,%20N.%20M.,%20Jancewicz,%20A.%20L.%20&%20Masson,%20P.%20H.%20Molecular%20mechanisms%20of%20root%20gravitropism.%20Curr.%20Biol.27,%20R964%E2%80%93R972%20\(2017\).)\]
*   5.Friml, J. Auxin transport—shaping the plant. _Curr. Opin. Plant Biol._**6**, 7–12 (2003). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1369526602000031)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12495745/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Friml,%20J.%20Auxin%20transport%E2%80%94shaping%20the%20plant.%20Curr.%20Opin.%20Plant%20Biol.6,%207%E2%80%9312%20\(2003\).)\]
*   6.Chen, J. et al. Amyloplast sedimentation repolarizes LAZYs to achieve gravity sensing in plants. _Cell_, **186**, 4788–4802 (2023). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2023.09.014)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10615846/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37741279/)\]
*   7.Nishimura, T. et al. Cell polarity linked to gravity sensing is generated by LZY translocation from statoliths to the plasma membrane. _Science_**381**, 1006–1010 (2023). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.adh9978)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37561884/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Nishimura,%20T.%20et%20al.%20Cell%20polarity%20linked%20to%20gravity%20sensing%20is%20generated%20by%20LZY%20translocation%20from%20statoliths%20to%20the%20plasma%20membrane.%20Science381,%201006%E2%80%931010%20\(2023\).)\]
*   8.Abas, L. et al. Intracellular trafficking and proteolysis of the Arabidopsis auxin-efflux facilitator PIN2 are involved in root gravitropism. _Nat. Cell Biol._**8**, 249–256 (2006). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb1369)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16489343/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Abas,%20L.%20et%20al.%20Intracellular%20trafficking%20and%20proteolysis%20of%20the%20Arabidopsis%20auxin-efflux%20facilitator%20PIN2%20are%20involved%20in%20root%20gravitropism.%20Nat.%20Cell%20Biol.8,%20249%E2%80%93256%20\(2006\).)\]
*   9.Friml, J., Wiśniewska, J., Benková, E., Mendgen, K. & Palme, K. Lateral relocation of auxin efflux regulator PIN3 mediates tropism in Arabidopsis. _Nature_**415**, 806–809 (2002). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/415806a)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11845211/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Friml,%20J.,%20Wi%C5%9Bniewska,%20J.,%20Benkov%C3%A1,%20E.,%20Mendgen,%20K.%20&%20Palme,%20K.%20Lateral%20relocation%20of%20auxin%20efflux%20regulator%20PIN3%20mediates%20tropism%20in%20Arabidopsis.%20Nature415,%20806%E2%80%93809%20\(2002\).)\]
*   10.Kleine-Vehn, J. et al. Gravity-induced PIN transcytosis for polarization of auxin fluxes in gravity-sensing root cells. _Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA_**107**, 22344–22349 (2010). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1013145107)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3009804/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21135243/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Kleine-Vehn,%20J.%20et%20al.%20Gravity-induced%20PIN%20transcytosis%20for%20polarization%20of%20auxin%20fluxes%20in%20gravity-sensing%20root%20cells.%20Proc.%20Nat.%20Acad.%20Sci.%20USA107,%2022344%E2%80%9322349%20\(2010\).)\]
*   11.Li, L., Gallei, M. & Friml, J. Bending to auxin: fast acid growth for tropisms. _Trends Plant Sci._**27**, 440–449 (2022). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tplants.2021.11.006)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34848141/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Li,%20L.,%20Gallei,%20M.%20&%20Friml,%20J.%20Bending%20to%20auxin:%20fast%20acid%20growth%20for%20tropisms.%20Trends%20Plant%20Sci.27,%20440%E2%80%93449%20\(2022\).)\]
*   12.Müller, A. et al. AtPIN2 defines a locus of Arabidopsis for root gravitropism control. _EMBO J_. **17**, 6903–6911 (1998). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/17.23.6903)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1171038/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9843496/)\]
*   13.Bennett, M. J. et al. Arabidopsis AUX1 gene: a permease-like regulator of root gravitropism. _Science_**273**, 948–950 (1996). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.273.5277.948)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8688077/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Bennett,%20M.%20J.%20et%20al.%20Arabidopsis%20AUX1%20gene:%20a%20permease-like%20regulator%20of%20root%20gravitropism.%20Science273,%20948%E2%80%93950%20\(1996\).)\]
*   14.Wang, L. et al. LARGE ROOT ANGLE1, encoding OsPIN2, is involved in root system architecture in rice. _J. Exp. Bot._**69**, 385–397 (2018). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erx427)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5853395/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29294052/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Wang,%20L.%20et%20al.%20LARGE%20ROOT%20ANGLE1,%20encoding%20OsPIN2,%20is%20involved%20in%20root%20system%20architecture%20in%20rice.%20J.%20Exp.%20Bot.69,%20385%E2%80%93397%20\(2018\).)\]
*   15.Giri, J. et al. Rice auxin influx carrier OsAUX1 facilitates root hair elongation in response to low external phosphate. _Nat. Commun._**9**, 1408 (2018). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-03850-4)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5897452/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29650967/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Giri,%20J.%20et%20al.%20Rice%20auxin%20influx%20carrier%20OsAUX1%20facilitates%20root%20hair%20elongation%20in%20response%20to%20low%20external%20phosphate.%20Nat.%20Commun.9,%201408%20\(2018\).)\]
*   16.Li, Y. et al. A root system architecture regulator modulates OsPIN2 polar localization in rice. _Nat. Commun._**16**, 15 (2025). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-55324-5)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11697098/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/39747021/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Li,%20Y.%20et%20al.%20A%20root%20system%20architecture%20regulator%20modulates%20OsPIN2%20polar%20localization%20in%20rice.%20Nat.%20Commun.16,%2015%20\(2025\).)\]
*   17.Dubois, M., Van den Broeck, L. & Inzé, D. The pivotal role of ethylene in plant growth. _Trends Plant Sci._**23**, 311–323 (2018). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tplants.2018.01.003)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5890734/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29428350/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Dubois,%20M.,%20Van%20den%20Broeck,%20L.%20&%20Inz%C3%A9,%20D.%20The%20pivotal%20role%20of%20ethylene%20in%20plant%20growth.%20Trends%20Plant%20Sci.23,%20311%E2%80%93323%20\(2018\).)\]
*   18.Zhao, H., Yin, C.-C., Ma, B., Chen, S.-Y. & Zhang, J.-S. Ethylene signaling in rice and Arabidopsis: New regulators and mechanisms. _J. Integr. Plant Biol._**63**, 102–125 (2021). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/jipb.13028)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33095478/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Zhao,%20H.,%20Yin,%20C.-C.,%20Ma,%20B.,%20Chen,%20S.-Y.%20&%20Zhang,%20J.-S.%20Ethylene%20signaling%20in%20rice%20and%20Arabidopsis:%20New%20regulators%20and%20mechanisms.%20J.%20Integr.%20Plant%20Biol.63,%20102%E2%80%93125%20\(2021\).)\]
*   19.Chang, C., Kwok, S. F., Bleecker, A. B. & Meyerowitz, E. M. Arabidopsis ethylene-response gene ETR1: similarity of product to two-component regulators. _Science_**262**, 539–544 (1993). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.8211181)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8211181/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Chang,%20C.,%20Kwok,%20S.%20F.,%20Bleecker,%20A.%20B.%20&%20Meyerowitz,%20E.%20M.%20Arabidopsis%20ethylene-response%20gene%20ETR1:%20similarity%20of%20product%20to%20two-component%20regulators.%20Science262,%20539%E2%80%93544%20\(1993\).)\]
*   20.Hua, J., Chang, C., Sun, Q. & Meyerowitz, E. M. Ethylene insensitivity conferred by arabidopsis ERS gene. _Science_**269**, 1712–1714 (1995). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.7569898)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7569898/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Hua,%20J.,%20Chang,%20C.,%20Sun,%20Q.%20&%20Meyerowitz,%20E.%20M.%20Ethylene%20insensitivity%20conferred%20by%20arabidopsis%20ERS%20gene.%20Science269,%201712%E2%80%931714%20\(1995\).)\]
*   21.Hua, J. et al. EIN4 and ERS2 are members of the putative ethylene receptor gene family in Arabidopsis. _Plant Cell_**10**, 1321–1332 (1998). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.10.8.1321)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC144061/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9707532/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Hua,%20J.%20et%20al.%20EIN4%20and%20ERS2%20are%20members%20of%20the%20putative%20ethylene%20receptor%20gene%20family%20in%20Arabidopsis.%20Plant%20Cell10,%201321%E2%80%931332%20\(1998\).)\]
*   22.Ju, C. et al. CTR1 phosphorylates the central regulator EIN2 to control ethylene hormone signaling from the ER membrane to the nucleus in Arabidopsis. _Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA_**109**, 19486–19491 (2012). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1214848109)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3511113/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23132950/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Ju,%20C.%20et%20al.%20CTR1%20phosphorylates%20the%20central%20regulator%20EIN2%20to%20control%20ethylene%20hormone%20signaling%20from%20the%20ER%20membrane%20to%20the%20nucleus%20in%20Arabidopsis.%20Proc.%20Nat.%20Acad.%20Sci.%20USA109,%2019486%E2%80%9319491%20\(2012\).)\]
*   23.Qiao, H. et al. Processing and subcellular trafficking of ER-tethered EIN2 control response to ethylene gas. _Science_**338**, 390–393 (2012). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1225974)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3523706/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22936567/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Qiao,%20H.%20et%20al.%20Processing%20and%20subcellular%20trafficking%20of%20ER-tethered%20EIN2%20control%20response%20to%20ethylene%20gas.%20Science338,%20390%E2%80%93393%20\(2012\).)\]
*   24.Kieber, J. J., Rothenberg, M., Roman, G., Feldmann, K. A. & Ecker, J. R. CTR1, a negative regulator of the ethylene response pathway in Arabidopsis, encodes a member of the raf family of protein kinases. _Cell_**72**, 427–441 (1993). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674\(93\)90119-b)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8431946/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Kieber,%20J.%20J.,%20Rothenberg,%20M.,%20Roman,%20G.,%20Feldmann,%20K.%20A.%20&%20Ecker,%20J.%20R.%20CTR1,%20a%20negative%20regulator%20of%20the%20ethylene%20response%20pathway%20in%20Arabidopsis,%20encodes%20a%20member%20of%20the%20raf%20family%20of%20protein%20kinases.%20Cell72,%20427%E2%80%93441%20\(1993\).)\]
*   25.Chao, Q. et al. Activation of the ethylene gas response pathway in arabidopsis by the nuclear protein ETHYLENE-INSENSITIVE3 and related proteins. _Cell_**89**, 1133–1144 (1997). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674\(00\)80300-1)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9215635/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Chao,%20Q.%20et%20al.%20Activation%20of%20the%20ethylene%20gas%20response%20pathway%20in%20arabidopsis%20by%20the%20nuclear%20protein%20ETHYLENE-INSENSITIVE3%20and%20related%20proteins.%20Cell89,%201133%E2%80%931144%20\(1997\).)\]
*   26.Solano, R., Stepanova, A., Chao, Q. & Ecker, J. R. Nuclear events in ethylene signaling: a transcriptional cascade mediated by ETHYLENE-INSENSITIVE3 and ETHYLENE-RESPONSE-FACTOR1. _Genes Dev._**12**, 3703–3714 (1998). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.12.23.3703)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC317251/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9851977/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Solano,%20R.,%20Stepanova,%20A.,%20Chao,%20Q.%20&%20Ecker,%20J.%20R.%20Nuclear%20events%20in%20ethylene%20signaling:%20a%20transcriptional%20cascade%20mediated%20by%20ETHYLENE-INSENSITIVE3%20and%20ETHYLENE-RESPONSE-FACTOR1.%20Genes%20Dev.12,%203703%E2%80%933714%20\(1998\).)\]
*   27.Guo, H. & Ecker, J. R. Plant responses to ethylene gas are mediated by SCFEBF1/EBF2-dependent proteolysis of EIN3 transcription factor. _Cell_**115**, 667–677 (2003). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674\(03\)00969-3)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14675532/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Guo,%20H.%20&%20Ecker,%20J.%20R.%20Plant%20responses%20to%20ethylene%20gas%20are%20mediated%20by%20SCFEBF1/EBF2-dependent%20proteolysis%20of%20EIN3%20transcription%20factor.%20Cell115,%20667%E2%80%93677%20\(2003\).)\]
*   28.Potuschak, T. et al. EIN3-dependent regulation of plant ethylene hormone signaling by two arabidopsis F box proteins: EBF1 and EBF2. _Cell_**115**, 679–689 (2003). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674\(03\)00968-1)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14675533/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Potuschak,%20T.%20et%20al.%20EIN3-dependent%20regulation%20of%20plant%20ethylene%20hormone%20signaling%20by%20two%20arabidopsis%20F%20box%20proteins:%20EBF1%20and%20EBF2.%20Cell115,%20679%E2%80%93689%20\(2003\).)\]
*   29.Yang, C., Lu, X., Ma, B., Chen, S.-Y. & Zhang, J.-S. Ethylene signaling in rice and arabidopsis: Conserved and diverged aspects. _Mol. Plant_**8**, 495–505 (2015). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molp.2015.01.003)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25732590/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Yang,%20C.,%20Lu,%20X.,%20Ma,%20B.,%20Chen,%20S.-Y.%20&%20Zhang,%20J.-S.%20Ethylene%20signaling%20in%20rice%20and%20arabidopsis:%20Conserved%20and%20diverged%20aspects.%20Mol.%20Plant8,%20495%E2%80%93505%20\(2015\).)\]
*   30.Pandey, B. K. et al. Plant roots sense soil compaction through restricted ethylene diffusion. _Science_**371**, 276–280 (2021). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abf3013)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33446554/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Pandey,%20B.%20K.%20et%20al.%20Plant%20roots%20sense%20soil%20compaction%20through%20restricted%20ethylene%20diffusion.%20Science371,%20276%E2%80%93280%20\(2021\).)\]
*   31.Huang, G. et al. Ethylene inhibits rice root elongation in compacted soil via ABA-and auxin-mediated mechanisms. _Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA_**119**, e2201072119 (2022). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2201072119)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9335218/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35858424/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Huang,%20G.%20et%20al.%20Ethylene%20inhibits%20rice%20root%20elongation%20in%20compacted%20soil%20via%20ABA-and%20auxin-mediated%20mechanisms.%20Proc.%20Nat.%20Acad.%20Sci.%20USA119,%20e2201072119%20\(2022\).)\]
*   32.Zhou, Y. et al. Rice EIL1 interacts with OsIAAs to regulate auxin biosynthesis mediated by the tryptophan aminotransferase MHZ10/OsTAR2 during root ethylene responses. _Plant Cell_**34**, 4366–4387 (2022). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/plcell/koac250)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9614475/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35972379/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Zhou,%20Y.%20et%20al.%20Rice%20EIL1%20interacts%20with%20OsIAAs%20to%20regulate%20auxin%20biosynthesis%20mediated%20by%20the%20tryptophan%20aminotransferase%20MHZ10/OsTAR2%20during%20root%20ethylene%20responses.%20Plant%20Cell34,%204366%E2%80%934387%20\(2022\).)\]
*   33.Zhou, Y. et al. CELLULOSE SYNTHASE-LIKE C proteins modulate cell wall establishment during ethylene-mediated root growth inhibition in rice. _Plant Cell_**36**, 3751–3769 (2024). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/plcell/koae195)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11371184/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38943676/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Zhou,%20Y.%20et%20al.%20CELLULOSE%20SYNTHASE-LIKE%20C%20proteins%20modulate%20cell%20wall%20establishment%20during%20ethylene-mediated%20root%20growth%20inhibition%20in%20rice.%20Plant%20Cell36,%203751%E2%80%933769%20\(2024\).)\]
*   34.Buer, C. S., Sukumar, P. & Muday, G. K. Ethylene modulates flavonoid accumulation and gravitropic responses in roots of Arabidopsis. _Plant Physiol._**140**, 1384–1396 (2006). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.105.075671)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1435817/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16489132/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Buer,%20C.%20S.,%20Sukumar,%20P.%20&%20Muday,%20G.%20K.%20Ethylene%20modulates%20flavonoid%20accumulation%20and%20gravitropic%20responses%20in%20roots%20of%20Arabidopsis.%20Plant%20Physiol.140,%201384%E2%80%931396%20\(2006\).)\]
*   35.Kong, X. et al. Ethylene regulates auxin-mediated root gravitropic machinery and controls root angle in cereal crops. _Plant Physiol_. **195**, 1969–1980 (2024). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/plphys/kiae134)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38446735/)\]
*   36.Luschnig, C., Gaxiola, R. A., Grisafi, P. & Fink, G. R. EIR1, a root-specific protein involved in auxin transport, is required for gravitropism inArabidopsis thaliana. _Genes Dev._**12**, 2175–2187 (1998). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.12.14.2175)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC317016/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9679062/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Luschnig,%20C.,%20Gaxiola,%20R.%20A.,%20Grisafi,%20P.%20&%20Fink,%20G.%20R.%20EIR1,%20a%20root-specific%20protein%20involved%20in%20auxin%20transport,%20is%20required%20for%20gravitropism%20inArabidopsis%20thaliana.%20Genes%20Dev.12,%202175%E2%80%932187%20\(1998\).)\]
*   37.Chen, H. et al. E3 ubiquitin ligase SOR1 regulates ethylene response in rice root by modulating stability of Aux/IAA protein. _Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA_**115**, 4513–4518 (2018). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1719387115)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5924906/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29632179/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Chen,%20H.%20et%20al.%20E3%20ubiquitin%20ligase%20SOR1%20regulates%20ethylene%20response%20in%20rice%20root%20by%20modulating%20stability%20of%20Aux/IAA%20protein.%20Proc.%20Nat.%20Acad.%20Sci.%20USA115,%204513%E2%80%934518%20\(2018\).)\]
*   38.Huang, Y.-H. et al. A translational regulator MHZ9 modulates ethylene signaling in rice. _Nat. Commun._**14**, 4674 (2023). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-40429-0)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10403538/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37542048/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Huang,%20Y.-H.%20et%20al.%20A%20translational%20regulator%20MHZ9%20modulates%20ethylene%20signaling%20in%20rice.%20Nat.%20Commun.14,%204674%20\(2023\).)\]
*   39.Ma, F., Yang, X., Shi, Z. & Miao, X. Novel crosstalk between ethylene- and jasmonic acid-pathway responses to a piercing–sucking insect in rice. _N. Phytol._**225**, 474–487 (2020). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.16111)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31407341/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Ma,%20F.,%20Yang,%20X.,%20Shi,%20Z.%20&%20Miao,%20X.%20Novel%20crosstalk%20between%20ethylene-%20and%20jasmonic%20acid-pathway%20responses%20to%20a%20piercing%E2%80%93sucking%20insect%20in%20rice.%20N.%20Phytol.225,%20474%E2%80%93487%20\(2020\).)\]
*   40.Ma, F. et al. The F-box protein OsEBF2 confers the resistance to the brown planthopper (Nilparvata lugens Stål). _Plant Sci._**327**, 111547 (2023). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plantsci.2022.111547)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36462682/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Ma,%20F.%20et%20al.%20The%20F-box%20protein%20OsEBF2%20confers%20the%20resistance%20to%20the%20brown%20planthopper%20\(Nilparvata%20lugens%20St%C3%A5l\).%20Plant%20Sci.327,%20111547%20\(2023\).)\]
*   41.Zhao, H. et al. Histidine kinase MHZ1/OsHK1 interacts with ethylene receptors to regulate root growth in rice. _Nat. Commun._**11**, 518 (2020). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-14313-0)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6981129/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31980616/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Zhao,%20H.%20et%20al.%20Histidine%20kinase%20MHZ1/OsHK1%20interacts%20with%20ethylene%20receptors%20to%20regulate%20root%20growth%20in%20rice.%20Nat.%20Commun.11,%20518%20\(2020\).)\]
*   42.Yang, C. et al. MAOHUZI6/ETHYLENE INSENSITIVE3-LIKE1 and ETHYLENE INSENSITIVE3-LIKE2 regulate ethylene response of roots and coleoptiles and negatively affect salt tolerance in rice. _Plant Physiol._**169**, 148–165 (2015). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.15.00353)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4577385/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25995326/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Yang,%20C.%20et%20al.%20MAOHUZI6/ETHYLENE%20INSENSITIVE3-LIKE1%20and%20ETHYLENE%20INSENSITIVE3-LIKE2%20regulate%20ethylene%20response%20of%20roots%20and%20coleoptiles%20and%20negatively%20affect%20salt%20tolerance%20in%20rice.%20Plant%20Physiol.169,%20148%E2%80%93165%20\(2015\).)\]
*   43.Li, W. et al. EIN2-directed translational regulation of ethylene signaling in Arabidopsis. _Cell_**163**, 670–683 (2015). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2015.09.037)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26496607/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Li,%20W.%20et%20al.%20EIN2-directed%20translational%20regulation%20of%20ethylene%20signaling%20in%20Arabidopsis.%20Cell163,%20670%E2%80%93683%20\(2015\).)\]
*   44.Yamauchi, T. et al. An NADPH oxidase RBOH functions in rice roots during lysigenous aerenchyma formation under oxygen-deficient conditions. _Plant Cell_**29**, 775–790 (2017). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.16.00976)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5435434/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28351990/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Yamauchi,%20T.%20et%20al.%20An%20NADPH%20oxidase%20RBOH%20functions%20in%20rice%20roots%20during%20lysigenous%20aerenchyma%20formation%20under%20oxygen-deficient%20conditions.%20Plant%20Cell29,%20775%E2%80%93790%20\(2017\).)\]
*   45.Cosio, C. & Dunand, C. Specific functions of individual class III peroxidase genes. _J. Exp. Bot._**60**, 391–408 (2009). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/ern318)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19088338/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Cosio,%20C.%20&%20Dunand,%20C.%20Specific%20functions%20of%20individual%20class%20III%20peroxidase%20genes.%20J.%20Exp.%20Bot.60,%20391%E2%80%93408%20\(2009\).)\]
*   46.Tang, D., Kang, R., Berghe, T. V., Vandenabeele, P. & Kroemer, G. The molecular machinery of regulated cell death. _Cell Res_**29**, 347–364 (2019). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41422-019-0164-5)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6796845/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30948788/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Tang,%20D.,%20Kang,%20R.,%20Berghe,%20T.%20V.,%20Vandenabeele,%20P.%20&%20Kroemer,%20G.%20The%20molecular%20machinery%20of%20regulated%20cell%20death.%20Cell%20Res29,%20347%E2%80%93364%20\(2019\).)\]
*   47.Wei, S. et al. A transcriptional regulator that boosts grain yields and shortens the growth duration of rice. _Science_**377**, 386–396 (2022). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abi8455)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35862527/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Wei,%20S.%20et%20al.%20A%20transcriptional%20regulator%20that%20boosts%20grain%20yields%20and%20shortens%20the%20growth%20duration%20of%20rice.%20Science377,%20386%E2%80%93396%20\(2022\).)\]
*   48.Luan, S. & Wang, C. Calcium signaling mechanisms across kingdoms. _Annu Rev. Cell Dev. Biol._**37**, 311–340 (2021). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-cellbio-120219-035210)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34375534/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Luan,%20S.%20&%20Wang,%20C.%20Calcium%20signaling%20mechanisms%20across%20kingdoms.%20Annu%20Rev.%20Cell%20Dev.%20Biol.37,%20311%E2%80%93340%20\(2021\).)\]
*   49.Toyota, M. et al. Glutamate triggers long-distance, calcium-based plant defense signaling. _Science_**361**, 1112–1115 (2018). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aat7744)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30213912/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Toyota,%20M.%20et%20al.%20Glutamate%20triggers%20long-distance,%20calcium-based%20plant%20defense%20signaling.%20Science361,%201112%E2%80%931115%20\(2018\).)\]
*   50.Krebs, M. et al. FRET-based genetically encoded sensors allow high-resolution live cell imaging of Ca2+ dynamics. _Plant J._**69**, 181–192 (2012). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-313X.2011.04780.x)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21910770/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Krebs,%20M.%20et%20al.%20FRET-based%20genetically%20encoded%20sensors%20allow%20high-resolution%20live%20cell%20imaging%20of%20Ca2+%20dynamics.%20Plant%20J.69,%20181%E2%80%93192%20\(2012\).)\]
*   51.Wang, K. L.-C., Li, H. & Ecker, J. R. Ethylene biosynthesis and signaling networks. _Plant Cell_**14**, S131–S151 (2002). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.001768)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC151252/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12045274/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Wang,%20K.%20L.-C.,%20Li,%20H.%20&%20Ecker,%20J.%20R.%20Ethylene%20biosynthesis%20and%20signaling%20networks.%20Plant%20Cell14,%20S131%E2%80%93S151%20\(2002\).)\]
*   52.Kiss, J. Z., Wright, J. B. & Caspar, T. Gravitropism in roots of intermediate‐starch mutants of Arabidopsis. _Physiologia Plant._**97**, 237–244 (1996). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1034/j.1399-3054.1996.970205.x)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11539189/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Kiss,%20J.%20Z.,%20Wright,%20J.%20B.%20&%20Caspar,%20T.%20Gravitropism%20in%20roots%20of%20intermediate%E2%80%90starch%20mutants%20of%20Arabidopsis.%20Physiologia%20Plant.97,%20237%E2%80%93244%20\(1996\).)\]
*   53.Caspar, T. & Pickard, B. G. Gravitropism in a starchless mutant of arabidopsis: Implications for the starch-statolith theory of gravity sensing. _Planta_**177**, 185–197 (1989). \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11539758/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Caspar,%20T.%20&%20Pickard,%20B.%20G.%20Gravitropism%20in%20a%20starchless%20mutant%20of%20arabidopsis:%20Implications%20for%20the%20starch-statolith%20theory%20of%20gravity%20sensing.%20Planta177,%20185%E2%80%93197%20\(1989\).)\]
*   54.Zwiewka, M. et al. Root adaptation to H2O2\-induced oxidative stress by ARF-GEF BEN1- and cytoskeleton-mediated PIN2 trafficking. _Plant Cell Physiol._**60**, 255–273 (2019). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/pcp/pcz001)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30668780/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Zwiewka,%20M.%20et%20al.%20Root%20adaptation%20to%20H2O2-induced%20oxidative%20stress%20by%20ARF-GEF%20BEN1-%20and%20cytoskeleton-mediated%20PIN2%20trafficking.%20Plant%20Cell%20Physiol.60,%20255%E2%80%93273%20\(2019\).)\]
*   55.Jacobsen, A. G. R., Jervis, G., Xu, J., Topping, J. F. & Lindsey, K. Root growth responses to mechanical impedance are regulated by a network of ROS, ethylene and auxin signalling in Arabidopsis. _N. Phytol._**231**, 225–242 (2021). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.17180)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8651006/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33428776/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Jacobsen,%20A.%20G.%20R.,%20Jervis,%20G.,%20Xu,%20J.,%20Topping,%20J.%20F.%20&%20Lindsey,%20K.%20Root%20growth%20responses%20to%20mechanical%20impedance%20are%20regulated%20by%20a%20network%20of%20ROS,%20ethylene%20and%20auxin%20signalling%20in%20Arabidopsis.%20N.%20Phytol.231,%20225%E2%80%93242%20\(2021\).)\]
*   56.Buer, C. S., Masle, J. & Wasteneys, G. O. Growth conditions modulate root-wave phenotypes in arabidopsis. _Plant Cell Physiol._**41**, 1164–1170 (2000). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/pcp/pcd042)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11148276/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Buer,%20C.%20S.,%20Masle,%20J.%20&%20Wasteneys,%20G.%20O.%20Growth%20conditions%20modulate%20root-wave%20phenotypes%20in%20arabidopsis.%20Plant%20Cell%20Physiol.41,%201164%E2%80%931170%20\(2000\).)\]
*   57.Buer, C. S., Wasteneys, G. O. & Masle, J. Ethylene modulates root-wave responses in arabidopsis. _Plant Physiol._**132**, 1085–1096 (2003). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.102.019182)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC167046/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12805636/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Buer,%20C.%20S.,%20Wasteneys,%20G.%20O.%20&%20Masle,%20J.%20Ethylene%20modulates%20root-wave%20responses%20in%20arabidopsis.%20Plant%20Physiol.132,%201085%E2%80%931096%20\(2003\).)\]
*   58.Zhang, Z. et al. _Arabidopsis_ MLO4 functions as a Ca2+ channel essential for mechanosensing in root tips. _BioRxiv_. 2022.06.05.494847 (2022).
*   59.Porat, A., Tekinalp, A., Bhosale, Y., Gazzola, M. & Meroz, Y. On the mechanical origins of waving, coiling and skewing in arabidopsis thaliana roots. _Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA_**121**, e2312761121 (2024). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2312761121)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10945788/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38446852/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Porat,%20A.,%20Tekinalp,%20A.,%20Bhosale,%20Y.,%20Gazzola,%20M.%20&%20Meroz,%20Y.%20On%20the%20mechanical%20origins%20of%20waving,%20coiling%20and%20skewing%20in%20arabidopsis%20thaliana%20roots.%20Proc.%20Nat.%20Acad.%20Sci.%20USA121,%20e2312761121%20\(2024\).)\]
*   60.Braam, J. & Davis, R. W. Rain-, wind-, and touch-induced expression of calmodulin and calmodulin-related genes in Arabidopsis. _Cell_**60**, 357–364 (1990). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674\(90\)90587-5)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2302732/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Braam,%20J.%20&%20Davis,%20R.%20W.%20Rain-,%20wind-,%20and%20touch-induced%20expression%20of%20calmodulin%20and%20calmodulin-related%20genes%20in%20Arabidopsis.%20Cell60,%20357%E2%80%93364%20\(1990\).)\]
*   61.Braam, J. In touch: plant responses to mechanical stimuli. _N. Phytol._**165**, 373–389 (2005). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8137.2004.01263.x)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15720650/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Braam,%20J.%20In%20touch:%20plant%20responses%20to%20mechanical%20stimuli.%20N.%20Phytol.165,%20373%E2%80%93389%20\(2005\).)\]
*   62.Bowman, J. L. et al. Insights into land plant evolution garnered from the marchantia polymorpha genome. _Cell_**171**, 287–304. e215 (2017). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.09.030)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28985561/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Bowman,%20J.%20L.%20et%20al.%20Insights%20into%20land%20plant%20evolution%20garnered%20from%20the%20marchantia%20polymorpha%20genome.%20Cell171,%20287%E2%80%93304.%20e215%20\(2017\).)\]
*   63.Xie, X. et al. CRISPR-GE: a convenient software toolkit for CRISPR-based genome editing. _Mol. Plant_**10**, 1246–1249 (2017). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molp.2017.06.004)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28624544/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Xie,%20X.%20et%20al.%20CRISPR-GE:%20a%20convenient%20software%20toolkit%20for%20CRISPR-based%20genome%20editing.%20Mol.%20Plant10,%201246%E2%80%931249%20\(2017\).)\]
*   64.Hiei, Y., Komari, T. & Kubo, T. Transformation of rice mediated by agrobacterium tumefaciens. _Plant Mol. Biol._**35**, 205–218 (1997). \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9291974/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Hiei,%20Y.,%20Komari,%20T.%20&%20Kubo,%20T.%20Transformation%20of%20rice%20mediated%20by%20agrobacterium%20tumefaciens.%20Plant%20Mol.%20Biol.35,%20205%E2%80%93218%20\(1997\).)\]
*   65.Wang, H.-Q., Zhao, X.-Y., Xuan, W., Wang, P. & Zhao, F.-J. Rice roots avoid asymmetric heavy metal and salinity stress via an RBOH-ROS-auxin signaling cascade. _Mol Plant_. **16**, 1678–1694 (2023). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molp.2023.09.007)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37735869/)\]
*   66.Ma, J. & Takahashi, E. Effect of silicon on the growth and phosphorus uptake of rice. _Plant Soil_**126**, 115–119 (1990). \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Ma,%20J.%20&%20Takahashi,%20E.%20Effect%20of%20silicon%20on%20the%20growth%20and%20phosphorus%20uptake%20of%20rice.%20Plant%20Soil126,%20115%E2%80%93119%20\(1990\).)\]
*   67.Li, H. & Durbin, R. Fast and accurate short read alignment with burrows–wheeler transform. _Bioinformatics_**25**, 1754–1760 (2009). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btp324)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2705234/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19451168/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Li,%20H.%20&%20Durbin,%20R.%20Fast%20and%20accurate%20short%20read%20alignment%20with%20burrows%E2%80%93wheeler%20transform.%20Bioinformatics25,%201754%E2%80%931760%20\(2009\).)\]
*   68.McKenna, A. et al. The genome analysis toolkit: A mapreduce framework for analyzing next-generation DNA sequencing data. _Genome Res_**20**, 1297–1303 (2010). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.107524.110)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2928508/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20644199/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?McKenna,%20A.%20et%20al.%20The%20genome%20analysis%20toolkit:%20A%20mapreduce%20framework%20for%20analyzing%20next-generation%20DNA%20sequencing%20data.%20Genome%20Res20,%201297%E2%80%931303%20\(2010\).)\]
*   69.Abe, A. et al. Genome sequencing reveals agronomically important loci in rice using MutMap. _Nat. Biotechnol._**30**, 174–178 (2012). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.2095)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22267009/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Abe,%20A.%20et%20al.%20Genome%20sequencing%20reveals%20agronomically%20important%20loci%20in%20rice%20using%20MutMap.%20Nat.%20Biotechnol.30,%20174%E2%80%93178%20\(2012\).)\]
*   70.Yoo, S.-D., Cho, Y.-H. & Sheen, J. Arabidopsis mesophyll protoplasts: a versatile cell system for transient gene expression analysis. _Nat. Protoc._**2**, 1565–1572 (2007). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2007.199)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17585298/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Yoo,%20S.-D.,%20Cho,%20Y.-H.%20&%20Sheen,%20J.%20Arabidopsis%20mesophyll%20protoplasts:%20a%20versatile%20cell%20system%20for%20transient%20gene%20expression%20analysis.%20Nat.%20Protoc.2,%201565%E2%80%931572%20\(2007\).)\]
*   71.Wang, H.-Q., Xuan, W., Huang, X.-Y., Mao, C. & Zhao, F.-J. Cadmium inhibits lateral root emergence in rice by disrupting OsPIN-mediated auxin distribution and the protective effect of OsHMA3. _Plant Cell Physiol._**62**, 166–177 (2021). \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/pcp/pcaa150)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33300991/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Wang,%20H.-Q.,%20Xuan,%20W.,%20Huang,%20X.-Y.,%20Mao,%20C.%20&%20Zhao,%20F.-J.%20Cadmium%20inhibits%20lateral%20root%20emergence%20in%20rice%20by%20disrupting%20OsPIN-mediated%20auxin%20distribution%20and%20the%20protective%20effect%20of%20OsHMA3.%20Plant%20Cell%20Physiol.62,%20166%E2%80%93177%20\(2021\).)\]

## Associated Data

_This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article._

### Supplementary Materials

### Data Availability Statement

The dataset of ZH11 and _crw1_ genome sequencing generated in this study have been deposited in the NCBI SRA database (NCBI: PRJNA1095451 \[[https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/1095451](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/1095451)\]. The dataset of RNA-seq generated in this study have been deposited in the NCBI SRA database (NCBI: PRJNA1095650) \[[https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/1095650](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/1095650)\]. [Source data](#Sec35) are provided with this paper.