---
title: "Immune Suppressive Extracellular Vesicle Proteins of Leptopilina heterotoma Are Encoded in the Wasp Genome"
authors: ["Brian Wey", "Mary Ellen Heavner", "Kameron T Wittmeyer", "Thomas Briese", "Keith R Hopper", "Shubha Govind"]
journal: "G3: Genes|Genomes|Genetics"
date: "2019 Nov 1"
doi: "10.1534/g3.119.400349"
source_url: "https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6945029/"
---

# Immune Suppressive Extracellular Vesicle Proteins of Leptopilina heterotoma Are Encoded in the Wasp Genome

*G3: Genes|Genomes|Genetics*, 2019 Nov 1, [doi:10.1534/g3.119.400349](https://doi.org/10.1534/g3.119.400349)

### Brian Wey
### Mary Ellen Heavner
### Kameron T Wittmeyer
### Thomas Briese
### Keith R Hopper
### Shubha Govind

## Abstract

_Leptopilina heterotoma_ are obligate parasitoid wasps that develop in the body of their _Drosophila_ hosts. During oviposition, female wasps introduce venom into the larval hosts’ body cavity. The venom contains discrete, 300 nm-wide, mixed-strategy extracellular vesicles (MSEVs), until recently referred to as virus-like particles. While the crucial immune suppressive functions of _L. heterotoma_ MSEVs have remained undisputed, their biotic nature and origin still remain controversial. In recent proteomics analyses of _L. heterotoma_ MSEVs, we identified 161 proteins in three classes: conserved eukaryotic proteins, infection and immunity related proteins, and proteins without clear annotation. Here we report 246 additional proteins from the _L. heterotoma_ MSEV proteome. An enrichment analysis of the entire proteome supports vesicular nature of these structures. Sequences for more than 90% of these proteins are present in the whole-body transcriptome. Sequencing and _de novo_ assembly of the 460 Mb-sized _L. heterotoma_ genome revealed 90% of MSEV proteins have coding regions within the genomic scaffolds. Altogether, these results explain the stable association of MSEVs with their wasps, and like other wasp structures, their vertical inheritance. While our results do not rule out a viral origin of MSEVs, they suggest that a similar strategy for co-opting cellular machinery for immune suppression may be shared by other wasps to gain advantage over their hosts. These results are relevant to our understanding of the evolution of figitid and related wasp species.

**Keywords:** Extracellular vesicle, whole genome sequencing, _Leptopilina heterotoma_, endoparasitoid wasp, _Drosophila_, VLP, host-parasite, organelle, immune suppression

* * *

Parasitic wasps are among the most abundant insects; they are vital to biodiversity and contribute to biological control of agricultural pests ([Narendran 2001](#bib65); [Rodriguez _et al._ 2013](#bib77)). A common strategy for reproductive success of parasitic wasps is suppression of immunity in their larval hosts. Parasitic wasps produce viruses or virus-like particles in tissues associated with the ovary. Wasps of the Ichneumonoidea superfamily produce symbiotic polydnaviruses (PDVs), which package circular dsDNA. PDV (Bracovirus (BV) in braconid wasps; Ichnovirus (IV) in ichneumonid wasps) genomes are integrated within the wasp genome as islands of viral genes. Upon oviposition, PDVs suppress host immunity. BVs and IVs derive from nudivirus and large DNA cytoplasmic viruses, respectively (reviewed in [Strand and Burke 2015](#bib86); [Drezen _et al._ 2017](#bib19); [Gauthier _et al._ 2018](#bib24), and references therein).

Immune-suppressive virus-like particles (VLPs) (_e.g._, VcVLPs in the ichneumonid _Venturia canescens_ and FaENVs in the braconid _Fopius arisanus_) lack proviral DNA segments, but are of viral origin and transfer virulence proteins into host cells ([Pichon _et al._ 2015](#bib73); [Burke _et al._ 2018](#bib6)). Viral genes encoding VLP proteins are either dispersed in the wasp genome (as in VcVLP) or present in discrete genomic areas (as in FaENV). Thus, various independent viral endogenization events have been important for successful parasitism by these wasps ([Strand and Burke 2015](#bib86); [Gauthier _et al._ 2018](#bib24)).

Here, we focus on immune-suppressive particles of figitid wasps in the genus _Leptopilina_, that infect _Drosophila_ spp. and are gaining importance as models for natural host-parasite interactions ([Keebaugh and Schlenke 2014](#bib45)). _Leptopilina heterotoma_ (_Lh_), _L. victoriae_ (_Lv_), and _L. boulardi_ (_Lb_) produce VLPs in their venom glands. The VLPs of _Leptopilina_ spp. and their proteins have been linked to parasite success ([Rizki _et al._ 1990](#bib76); [Dupas _et al._ 1996](#bib20); [Morales _et al._ 2005](#bib63); [Labrosse _et al._ 2005](#bib51); [Chiu _et al._ 2006](#bib10); [Heavner _et al._ 2014](#bib34)). Evidence for DNA in _Leptopilina_ VLPs is lacking, and because of the absence of a published wasp genome, the chromosomal _vs._ extrachromosomal location of MSEV protein genes is not known. Our goals here are (a) to describe additional proteins in the MSEV proteome and examine their relationship with PDV and other viral proteins, and (b) determine whether MSEV genes are encoded in the wasp genome.

We recently described 161 proteins in the VLPs from two _Lh_ strains in three classes: conserved eukaryotic with cellular function (Class 1), infection- and immunity-related (Class 2), and unannotated (novel) without similarity to known proteins (Class 3) ([Heavner _et al._ 2017](#bib35)). Class 1 proteins include several vesicular transport and endomembrane system proteins. Class 2 proteins include predicted modulators of immune response, _e.g._, metalloendopeptidases, RhoGAPs, a knottin-like protein, and a new family of prokaryotic-like GTPases whose genes lack introns. A striking example of Class 3 proteins is p40, with three-dimensional structural similarity to Type 3 secretion system (T3SS) needle-tip proteins, IpaD/SipD/BipD from Gram-negative bacteria, _Salmonella_, _Shigella_ and _Burkholderia_. Earlier results have indicated that the _p40_ gene (unlike the _GTPase_ genes) is expected to have introns. These results suggested that _Lh_ VLPs have novel properties with elements of the prokaryotic and eukaryotic secretion systems and possess a functionally diverse array of immune-suppressive proteins. We therefore renamed VLPs as Mixed Strategy Extracellular Vesicles (MSEVs). Their variable morphologies distinguish them from ordered PDV morphologies. Additionally, genes encoding abundant MSEV proteins p40 and GTPase are present even in antibiotic-treated wasps. These results favored a non-microbial nature for MSEVs ([Heavner _et al._ 2017](#bib35)).

Here, we present an analysis of an additional 246 proteins from the _Lh_ 14 MSEV proteome to obtain a more comprehensive description. A combined analysis of these and previous results reinforce the idea that the MSEV proteome is enriched in exosomal proteins and that Class 3 proteins are not shared with either _Lb_ or an unrelated _Ganaspis_ spp. Whole-body transcriptome of adult _Lh_ wasps validated the expression of the MSEV genes. _De novo_ genomic assembly and analyses revealed 90% of conserved Insecta Benchmarking Universal Single-Copy Orthologs (BUSCOs), as well as a majority (375/407; ∼90%) of the MSEV proteins are encoded in the wasp genome. While we cannot rule out a viral origin of MSEVs, in aggregate, our results provide a clearer understanding of the current nature of these complex structures and strengthen the idea that specialized extracellular vesicles transfer wasp virulence factors and other parasite proteins into _Drosophila_ host cells.

## Materials and Methods

### Insects

Isogenized _Lh_ strains New York (NY; ([Chiu and Govind 2002](#bib9); [Chiu _et al._ 2006](#bib10))) and _Lh_ 14 ([Schlenke _et al._ 2007](#bib78)), were raised on the _y w_ strain of _D. melanogaster_ that were reared on standard cornmeal, yeast, and agar fly food at 25° as described by [Small _et al_. (2012)](#bib81). Adult wasps were collected from parasitized hosts, 25 days after infection at 25°. Male and female wasps were stored on fly food with 70% honey on “buzz” plugs.

### Analysis of MSEV super-set ORFs

Previously undescribed open reading frames (ORFs) from the _Lh_ 14 MSEV proteome and sequenced as part of [Heavner _et al_. (2017)](#bib35) (PXD005632) are analyzed in the context of the published female abdominal ([Goecks _et al._ 2013](#bib27)) and whole body (this study) _Lh_ 14 transcriptomes. We have not observed any difference in venom activities of _Lh_ 14 and _Lh_ NY ([Morales _et al._ 2005](#bib63); [Schlenke _et al._ 2007](#bib78)), or in wasp success under laboratory conditions. The _Lh_ 14 ORFs were aligned against transcripts from BioProject: PRJNA202370, Accession number GAJC0000000 ([Goecks _et al._ 2013](#bib27)) as previously described in [Heavner _et al_. (2017)](#bib35). Proteins with an ORF and a transcript were run through the BLAST2GO (v 5.2; downloaded June 2018) annotation pipeline with an E-value threshold of 1x10−7 ([Conesa _et al._ 2005](#bib13); [Götz _et al._ 2008](#bib31)). Results were organized and classified based on Gene Ontology (GO) terms from UniProt and InterPro ([Ashburner _et al._ 2000](#bib3); [Jones _et al._ 2014](#bib39); [Uniport Consortium 2015](#bib14); [The Gene Ontology Consortium 2019](#bib8)). Proteins were considered “virulence-related” based on GO terms indicating involvement with infection, host evasion, inflammation, and immune response. ORFs that did not return results via BLAST or InterProScan (Class 3 proteins) were run through Conserved Domain Search (CDD) on NCBI (version 3.16) ([Marchler-Bauer _et al._ 2017](#bib58)). The E-value cut off for CDD search was 1x10−2. Proteins were considered to have a signal peptide if one was predicted using Phobeus and Signal P ([Käll _et al._ 2004](#bib41); [Käll _et al._ 2007](#bib42); [Nielsen 2017](#bib66); [Almagro Armenteros _et al._ 2019](#bib1)). Transmembrane domains were considered to be present if they were predicted using Phobeus and TMHMM ([Sonnhammer _et al._ 1998](#bib83); [Krogh _et al._ 2001](#bib50); [Käll _et al._ 2004](#bib41); [Käll _et al._ 2007](#bib42)).

The GhostKOALA algorithm ([Kanehisa _et al._ 2016](#bib44)) was used to assign KEGG ortholog (KO) numbers for the MSEV superset protein sequences. If a primary KO number failed to be assigned by GhostKOALA, a secondary number assignment with a score >= 50 was used. Redundant KO numbers were excluded.

MSEV proteins were included in the enrichment analyses only if a human ortholog exists; the gene identifiers for human orthologs were obtained from the MSEV KO and the UniProt mapping utility ([Li _et al._ 2015](#bib56); [Uniport Consortium 2015](#bib14)). (Human orthologs were chosen because a robust proportion of Vesiclepedia’s data are derived from human vesicle proteomes.) The orthologs of human genes were analyzed for enrichment with the FunRich algorithm ([Pathan _et al._ 2015](#bib70); [Pathan _et al._ 2017](#bib71)) against the Vesiclepedia database ([Kalra _et al._ 2012](#bib43); [Pathan _et al._ 2019](#bib69)).

Finally, the MSEV proteome was used as a query using BLASTp for the following databases: “non-redundant” (nr), nr restricted to Taxid: Viridae (10239), nr restricted to Taxid: Polydnaviridae (10482), and nr restricted to Taxid: Unclassified Polydnaviridae (40273) (E-value threshold: 1.0x10−3, %ID minimum: 20%, performed 04/16/2019). tBLASTn of _L. boulardi_ and _G. hookeri_ (previously called _Ganaspis spp. 1_) ([Goecks _et al._ 2013](#bib27)) transcriptomes was performed on 03/10/2019; the threshold for homologs in _Lb_ and _G. hookeri_ were 25% ID and an E-value of 1.0x10−10.

### Genomes sequencing and assembly

Library preparations, sequencing reactions, and associated validations were conducted by GENEWIZ, Inc. (South Plainfield, NJ, USA). Genomic DNA was extracted from ∼50 mg of tissue (∼100 wasps) of _Lh_ males and females separately using mixed bead beating and PureLink Genomic DNA extraction kits following manufacturer’s protocol. Quantification of extracted DNA was performed using Nanodrop and Qubit2.0 Fluorometer (Live Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Integrity of genomic DNA was verified by gel electrophoresis (0.6% agarose). DNA libraries were prepared for each wasp gender by acoustic shearing fragmentation using a Covaris S220. Fragments were end repaired and adenylated prior to adapter ligation on 3′ ends (NEB NextUltra DNA Library Preparation kit, Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). Enrichment and indexing of adapter-ligated DNA was done through limited cycle PCR. DNA library validation was performed using TapeStation (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA, USA). Libraries were quantified using Qubit 2.0 Fluorometer.

Real time PCR (Applied Biosystems, Carlsbad, CA, USA) was used to quantify DNA molar mass for each library before multiplexing in equal molar mass. DNA libraries were sequenced using a 2x150 paired-end (PE) configuration on one lane on an Illumina HiSeq 4000. Image analysis and base calling were performed using the HiSeq Control Software (HCS) on the HiSeq instrument.

The average size of inserts (without adaptors) in the Illumina library was ∼300-350 bp. _De novo_ assembly of reads and scaffolding of contigs was performed using ABySS 2.2 ([Jackman _et al._ 2017](#bib37)) by the New York Genome Center. _De novo_ assembly of combined male/female genome was performed using Platanus-allee ([Kajitani _et al._ 2019](#bib40)) and scaffolding was improved using AGOUTI ([Zhang _et al._ 2016](#bib96)) on the University of Delaware’s BIOMIX cluster.

Sequences from _Drosophila_\-associated bacteria such as _Wolbachia_ spp., _Acetobacter pasteurianus_, and _Lactobacillus plantarum_ were identified in both assemblies. _Wolbachia_ are endosymbionts of many insects including _Leptopilina_ spp. ([Pannebakker _et al._ 2004](#bib68); [Werren _et al._ 2008](#bib93); [Gueguen _et al._ 2012](#bib29)). _Lactobacilli_ and _Acetobacter_ are symbionts and commensals of sugar-consuming insects ([Crotti _et al._ 2010](#bib15); [Engel and Moran 2013](#bib21)). Among the three bacterial species, _Wolbachia_ sequences were the most abundant. BLASTx analysis showed that predicted genes from _Wolbachia_ scaffolds were associated with _Wolbachia_ proteins in GenBank. These bacterial and mitochondrial sequence-containing scaffolds were identified during the NCBI submission process and were manually removed from the submission.

### Evaluation of genome assemblies

Assemblies made with ABySS and Platanus-allee with AGOUTI were run through QUAST v4.0 ([Mikheenko _et al._ 2016](#bib61)) to determine scaffold number, N50, and GC%. All assemblies were examined for conserved genes and orthologs with BUSCO v9 ([Simão _et al._ 2015](#bib80); [Waterhouse _et al._ 2017](#bib92)) using the Insecta set and training parameters set to “Nasonia”. NCBI BLAST+ (v 2.7.1) was used to compare selected scaffolds produced from male and female genome assemblies ([Johnson _et al._ 2008](#bib38); [Camacho _et al._ 2009](#bib7)). E-value threshold was set at 1x10−7. E-values of alignments were considered acceptable if within the range of 0 to 1x10−10.

K-mer analysis was performed using the K-mer Analysis Toolkit (KAT) ([Mapleson _et al._ 2016](#bib57)) and heat maps were used to compare multiplicity (coverage plus repeats) of K-mers to GC content of the reads, coloring bins according to the number of distinct K-mers in each. This analysis was used to determine whether there were separate clusters of multiplicity/GC content that might arise from different sources, such as contamination. BLAST ([Altschul _et al._ 1990](#bib2); [Camacho _et al._ 2009](#bib7); [Johnson _et al._ 2008](#bib38)) was used to search for homologs of a random sample of genomic scaffolds to which reads from each cluster mapped. The joint assembly of the _Lh 14_ genome was compared to the published _L. clavipes_ genome (Bioproject: PRJNA84205 ([Kraaijeveld _et al._ 2016](#bib49))) through maps of 27-mer multiplicity _vs._ GC content. Finally, 27-mer multiplicity/GC content of the scaffolds (9.6 Mb) containing MSEV genes was compared to a random subset of scaffolds (9.6 Mb) without MSEV genes. Statistical differences between _Lh 14_ and _L. clavipes_ genomes and between MSEV-gene containing scaffolds and non-MSEV-gene containing scaffolds were calculated using a multivariate Cramér test ([Ihaka and Gentleman 1996](#bib36); [Baringhaus and Franz 2004](#bib4); [Franz 2019](#bib22)).

### Gene predictions, gene annotation, and viral gene searches

Gene predictions were performed on parallel and anti-parallel strands using AUGUSTUS (v3.3.1; August 2018) ([Stanke _et al._ 2004](#bib85); [Stanke and Morgenstern 2005](#bib84); [Keller _et al._ 2011](#bib46)) with the _Nasonia_ training set. The AUGUSTUS readout was separated into mRNA, coding DNA sequence (CDS), and translations by gffread ([Trapnell _et al._ 2012](#bib87)).

Gene predictions were annotated by performing a BLASTx of all gene predictions against the entire nr database (Downloaded on January 2019) and InterProScan on the University of Delaware BIOMIX Cluster before using BLAST2GO ([Conesa _et al._ 2005](#bib13); [Götz _et al._ 2008](#bib31)) to finish annotation based on BLASTx and InterProScan results.

NCBI BLAST+ (v 2.7.1) was used on a local machine to search predictions and scaffolds, cutoff was %ID >70%, E-value < 1E-50, and query coverage > 70%. MSEV genes and 1x10−2 for Polydnavirus and Nudivirus proteins. Family _Polydnaviridae_ and _Nudiviridae_ protein sequences for the 11 species available on OrthoDB v9 were downloaded on February 2019 ([Johnson _et al._ 2008](#bib38); [Camacho _et al._ 2009](#bib7)).

### Whole-body transcriptome sequencing and assembly

Total RNA extraction, library preparations, sequencing reactions, and bioinformatics analysis were conducted at GENEWIZ, INC (South Plainfield, NJ, USA). RNA was extracted from frozen tissue with the Qiagen RNeasy Plus Universal mini kit using manufacturer’s instructions (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). The extracted RNA was quantified using a Qubit 2.0 Fluorometer and its integrity was checked with the 4200 TapeStation (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA, USA).

RNA samples were enriched for mRNA using Oligo d(T) beads. RNA sequencing libraries were prepared using the NEBNext Ultra RNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina following manufacturer’s instructions (NEB, Ipswich, MA, USA). The sequencing libraries were validated by using the Agilent TapeStation. Quantification was performed using the Qubit 2.0 Fluorometer and quantitative PCR (KAPA Biosystems, Wilimington, MA, USA).

Sequencing libraries were clustered on a single lane of a flow cell and sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq 4000 instrument using a 2x150 PE configuration. Image analysis and base calling were conducted by the HCS. Raw sequence data (.bcl files) was converted into fastq files and de-multiplexed using Illumina’s bcl2fastq 2.17 software. One mismatch was allowed for index sequence identification.

The Trinity v2.5 ([Grabherr _et al._ 2011](#bib28)), _de novo_ assembler was used to assemble the _Lh 14_ transcripts. The _de novo_ assembled transcriptome was created with a minimum contig length of 200 bp per sample. Transrate v1.0.3 ([Smith-Unna _et al._ 2016](#bib82)) was used to generate statistics for the _de novo_ assembled transcriptome. EMBOSS tools getorf were then used to find the ORFs within the _de novo_ assembled transcriptome. The _de novo_ transcriptome assembly was then annotated using Diamond BLASTx ([Buchfink _et al._ 2015](#bib5)).

The transcriptome reads were mapped to the genomic scaffolds for downstream analyses using HISAT2 or BWA ([Li and Durbin 2009](#bib53); [Kim _et al._ 2015](#bib48)).

### Preparation of template DNA and PCR

Male and female wasps (n = 12, for each sex), were separated and washed in 70% ethanol, and then rinsed twice in deionized water. Genomic DNA (gDNA) was extracted using a Qiagen DNeasy Blood and Tissue kit following provided protocols. gDNA was eluted in Tris-EDTA buffer, pH 8.0, and stored at 4°. The concentration of gDNA was determined by NanoDrop (Thermo Fisher).

For cDNA preparation, male and female wasps (n = 12 for each sex), were separated and washed in 70% ethanol and rinsed twice in deionized water. Total body RNA was extracted using 100 µL of Trizol (Invitrogen) following manufacturer’s protocols. RNA was resuspended in 0.1% DEPC treated water and treated with DNase I to remove contaminating DNA (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The RNA concentration was determined by NanoDrop (Thermo Fisher). cDNA was synthesized using Proto-Script First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (New England Biolabs).

### Analysis of select genes

Primers for _p40 and SmGTPase01_ are as follows:

_p40_ forward: GAATCATTGTTCGTTTGCTTGAAGAAAGAATTGG

_p40_ reverse: CATTATTAATGGGCCTTTACAATAATTTTAGCC

_SmGTPase01_ forward: CGTTGCACTACCTTGTTTGTCA

_SmGTPase01_ reverse: TTGTCTTTGCCCTGAGCGTT

PCRs were performed with Taq polymerase (gift of C. Li lab, CCNY), PCR buffer (300 mM Tris HCl pH 9.5, 75 mM (NH4)2SO4, 10 mM MgCl2) and deoxyribonucleotides (0.2 mM; Thermo Fisher Scientific). The PCR products were resolved on a 1% agarose gel in Tris acetic acid EDTA buffer (40 mM Tris HCl pH 7.6, 20 mM acetic acid, 1mM EDTA pH 8.0). Ethidium bromide (Sigma Aldrich)-stained gels were visualized on an ultra violet Trans-Illuminator (UVP) and gel images were taken using the DigiDocIt Imaging System (UVP). Gel images were processed in Adobe Photoshop for clarity only.

gDNA or cDNA-containing PCR products were cloned into pCR TOPO II plasmids (Invitrogen) and transformed into DH10β competent cells (New England Biolabs). For plasmid preparation, colonies were screened via PCR and positive colonies were cultured in Luria Broth with ampicillin (100 µg/mL) at 37° overnight. Plasmids were extracted using Plasmid Miniprep kit (Qiagen) and sequenced (GENEWIZ, INC. South Plainfield, NJ, USA). Sequences were aligned using NCBI BLAST+ ([Johnson _et al._ 2008](#bib38); [Camacho _et al._ 2009](#bib7)) and Clustal Omega ([Li _et al._ 2015](#bib56)). Expected PCR band sizes were determined using SerialCloner (v2.6.1).

### Data availability

_L. heterotoma_ strains ([Chiu _et al._ 2006](#bib10); [Schlenke _et al._ 2007](#bib78)) are available upon request. File S1 contains details of supplemental files and tables. File S2 contains listing of accession numbers for all sequences reported in this work. Figure S1 contains the 27-mer _vs._ GC count comparison of MSEV containing scaffolds to non-MSEV containing scaffolds. Table S1 contains annotations and related data for proteins. Table S2 contains BLAST search results of the MSEV proteome against the nr database. Table S3 contains all BUSCOs found in male, female, and joint genome assemblies. MSEV protein sequences are available upon request. Accession numbers for datasets are as follows: _Leptopilina heterotoma_ strain _Lh_ 14, genome assembly: Male genome: QYUB0000000, Female genome: QYUC0000000, Joint genome: [VOOK00000000](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/VOOK00000000). _Leptopilina heterotoma_ strain _Lh_ 14, whole-body transcriptome: [GHUQ00000000](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/GHUQ00000000). _Leptopilina heterotoma_ abdominal transcriptome by Goecks _et al._: GAJC0000000. _Leptopilina clavipes_ genome Bioproject: PRJNA84205. _Leptopilina heterotoma_ strain _Lh_ 14 proteome: PRIDE: PXD005632. Supplemental material available at figshare: [https://doi.org/10.25387/g3.10005260](https://doi.org/10.25387/g3.10005260).

## Results and Discussion

### The MSEV proteome superset

A comparative study of the proteomes of the MSEVs from _Lh_ 14 and _Lh_ NY strains previously generated a list of 161 “common” MSEV proteins ([Heavner _et al._ 2017](#bib35)). More than 90% of the 161 proteins are part of the _Lh_ 14 MSEV proteome. To describe MSEVs more completely, we characterized a larger set of 407 MSEV proteins from _Lh_ 14 (161 common and 246 _Lh_ 14) and define this set as the _Lh_ MSEV “super-set” ([Figure 1A](#fig1)). Key results from annotation-based classification, analysis for signal peptide and/or transmembrane domain, and presence/absence of proteins in related wasps are summarized below and in Table S1.

The presence/absence of signal peptide (SP) alone, or SP with/without the transmembrane (TM) domain(s) in MSEV proteins reveals their possible location (_i.e._, potentially secreted into the venom gland lumen or associated with MSEV membrane). We therefore searched the 246 _Lh_ 14 proteins for SP and TM domains. Of the 246 proteins, 55 (22.35%) have a predicted SP domain, 37 (15.04%) have a predicted TM domain, while 6 (2.44%) have both a predicted SP and TM domain.

After annotation, we found that a majority (183/246 or 75%) of the 246 proteins can be classified as core eukaryotic cell biology proteins (Class 1); 13/246 (5%) proteins as virulence- and immunity-related based on associated GO terms ([Ashburner _et al._ 2000](#bib3); [The Gene Ontology Consortium 2019](#bib8)) (Class 2); and 50/246 or 20% as novel sequences without high confidence annotation (Class 3) (Table S1). A presence/absence analysis of these 246 proteins in published transcriptomes ([Goecks _et al._ 2013](#bib27)) of _Lb_ or a more distantly related wasp, _G. hookeri_ (for thresholds see Methods) revealed the following: only 43/246 (17%) _Lh_ MSEV proteins are expected to be found in _Lb_ and/or _G. hookeri_ (Table S1). Of these, 33/43 (77%) proteins were in Class 1 but only 7/43 (16%) and 3/43 (7%) were in Class 2 and Class 3 categories, respectively. These results support the idea that, multiple but different, infection strategies and/or host evasion strategies might exist among different wasps infecting the same hosts.

While most of the Class 1 proteins were annotated as ribosomal or mitochondrial-related, a few were described as integral membrane proteins, vesicle trafficking protein SEC22b (E-value: 6.22E-145), and the ion channels sideroflexin 1 and 2 (E-value: 0). We also identified an apolipophorin (E-value: 1.02E-7) (Table S1). The presence of these membrane-associated proteins reinforces the vesicular nature of MSEVs.

Examples of Class 2 proteins include the neural/ectodermal development factor IMP-L2 (E-value: 5.29x10−50) and a protein involved in pain reception, CG9231 (E-value: 4.39x10−15). A viral-like Diedel protein (E-value: 1.77x10−7), viral Enhancin (E-value: 6.02x10−5), l(2)37Cc (E-value: 3.39x10−165), odorant binding protein 56d-like (E-value: 5.64x10−50), major royal jelly protein (E-value: 8.59x10−135), and two venom acid-phosphatases Acph-1 (E-value: 4.12x10−5) were also found in the Class 2 category; their cDNA sequences were published previously ([Heavner _et al._ 2013](#bib33)) (Table S1). It is possible that these MSEV proteins modulate the hosts’ immune responses and/or influence host development to facilitate successful parasitism.

Within Class 3, 45 proteins (90%) lacked BLASTp and InterProScan results. However, Conserved Domain Database (CDD) ([Marchler-Bauer _et al._ 2017](#bib58)) searches returned 9 hits identifying potentially functional domains ([Table 1](#t1)). This included (a) a CD99L2 like antigen (%ID: 24%, E-value: 3x10−3), (b) a DEAD-like helicases superfamily member (%ID: 22%, E-value 2x10−4) and (c) a herpes outer envelope glycoprotein 350 (gp350), (%ID: 28%, E-value: 4x10−3) ([Table 1](#t1)).

#### Table 1. CDD-search results of MSEV “un-annotated” proteins in the super-set. MSEV ORFs that completed the BLAST2GO pipeline and did not return any results were run through the NCBI CDD-Search Version 3.16 (Accessed: Aug. 2018). Of 45 queries, only 9 returned hits with threshold set to 1x10−2. The ninth result came from a search with E-value threshold set to 1. Results listed are all unique, high scoring hits for each ORF that returned hits from the search.


| MSEV Superset Unknowns CDD-Search Results |
| --- |
| Query (in-house ID) | PSSM-ID | From | To | E-Value | Accession | Short name |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| [GAJC01013214](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/GAJC01013214).1\_14 | **331760** | **25** | **98** | **0.000176** | cl26939 | DEXDc superfamily |
| [GAJC01012558](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/GAJC01012558).1\_12 | **330317** | **39** | **205** | **0.003987** | cl25496 | Herpes\_BLLF1 superfamily/gp350 |
| [GAJC01011863](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/GAJC01011863).1\_13 | **311912** | **86** | **187** | **0.003653** | cl07006 | RNA\_polI\_A34 superfamily |
| [GAJC01011463](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/GAJC01011463).1\_48 | **315064** | **234** | **335** | **0.002964** | cl13702 | CD99L2 superfamily |
| [GAJC01010930](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/GAJC01010930).1\_16 | **328726** | **32** | **61** | **0.001252** | cl21457 | ICL\_KPHMT superfamily |
| [GAJC01010353](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/GAJC01010353).1\_14 | **331876** | **31** | **121** | **0.001483** | cl27055 | MutS\_III superfamily |
| [GAJC01009713](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/GAJC01009713).1\_25 | **311628** | **138** | **225** | **0.000133** | cl06688 | TSGP1 superfamily |
| [GAJC01009493](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/GAJC01009493).1\_4 | **328724** | **79** | **96** | **0.001983** | cl21455 | P-loop\_NTPase superfamily |
| [GAJC01002124](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/GAJC01002124).1\_43 | **330572** | **4** | **269** | **0.0073146** | cl25751 | DUF4045 superfamily |

A BLASTp DELTA-BLAST of the potential gp350 domain against the nr database specifying “Vira” (taxid: 10239) under organism resulted in Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever orthonairovirus envelope glycoprotein (%ID: 30%, E-value: 2.5x10−1), Lymphocryptovirus Macaca gp350 (%ID: 29%, E-value: 7.2x10−1), and Gallid Alphaherpesvirus 1 envelope glycoprotein J (%ID: 26%, E-value: 1.2) as top hits. BLASTp DELTA-BLAST of the potential gp350 domain against the nr database for Hymenoptera yielded an uncharacterized protein as the best hit (%ID: 24%, E-value: 8x10−6) in the ant _Vollenhovia emeryi_. This ant protein is predicted to contain calcium-binding EGF domains. The second hit in this search is from _N. vitripennis_ for a predicted mucin-3A like glycoprotein ([Gendler and Spicer 1995](#bib25)) (%ID: 24%, E-value: 2x10−4). Interestingly, transcripts related to the potential _Lh_ gp350-like protein are not found in the _Lb_ or _G. hookeri_ transcriptomes (Table S1) ([Goecks _et al._ 2013](#bib27)). Presence of this gp350-like protein in _Lh_ MSEVs, but its absence in _Lb_ MSEVs, suggests that it somehow contributes to differences in _Lh_/_Lb_ host-parasite interactions and is therefore worthy of future studies. Complement receptor type 2 (CR2) in human B lymphocytes interacts with gp350 during Epstein-Barr infection ([Young _et al._ 2008](#bib95)) and finding a verified homolog of CR2 in _Drosophila_ hosts would be interesting in future research.

Because more than 200 proteins have now been added to the previously described MSEV proteome ([Heavner _et al._ 2017](#bib35)), we re-evaluated our previous enrichment analysis. In an ortholog-based comparison of the superset to human extracellular vesicle (EV) proteomes in Vesiclepedia (the most current and robust source of EV data ([Kalra _et al._ 2012](#bib43))), we found that the largest proportion of superset proteins (49%) are proteins specifically associated with exosomes ([Figure 1B](#fig1)). In human and mouse EV proteomes, mitochondrial and ribosomal proteins are enriched ([Kalra _et al._ 2012](#bib43)). Accordingly, protein components of mitochondria (_e.g._, respiratory chain) and ribosomes (_e.g._, large and small subunit proteins) are found to be highly enriched in the _Lh_ MSEV superset. However, we found that the significance of the enrichment was higher between the superset and exosomal proteins than mitochondrial or ribosomal proteins ([Figure 1C](#fig1)). These results demonstrate the similarities in the protein profiles of MSEVs and EVs.

### Do Lh MSEVs contain homologs of PDV or viral proteins?

Even though figitid _Leptopilina_ wasps are distantly related to PDV-containing Ichneumonid and Braconid wasps ([Misof _et al._ 2014](#bib62); [Strand and Burke 2015](#bib86)), an association of PDV-like viruses in figitid wasps cannot be discounted because of shared evolutionary history. Recent publications have identified capsid-less VLPs in Ichneumonidae wasps ([Volkoff _et al._ 2010](#bib89); [Pichon _et al._ 2015](#bib73); [Burke _et al._ 2018](#bib6)) and it is possible that _Lh_ MSEVs have a similar viral origin. We therefore analyzed the _Lh_ MSEV proteome superset against the GenBank PDV database, and then against its entire Viridae database.

To identify false positives, MSEV proteins with positive PDV hits (E-values were less than 1.0x10−3, %ID was 20% or greater, and query coverage was 30% or higher) were also searched against the unrestricted nr database to compare relatedness. If an MSEV protein is similar to a viral or virus-related PDV protein, we expected that, in the unrestricted nr database search, the MSEV query sequence would align again with the same viral subject sequences, but with a lower E-value (Table S2).

For PDV searches (Taxid: 10482 and Taxid: 40273), four proteins returned hits with E-values better than 1.0x10−20 and query coverage greater than 30%. Three of these hits are conserved proteins (cytochrome P450 and histone 4) while the fourth result identified an uncharacterized _Cotesia congregata_ bracovirus (CcBV) protein (%ID: 31.08%, E-value: 1.38x10−17, query coverage: 77%) (Table S2). The unbiased BLASTp search against the entire nr database however had better results against eukaryotic proteins (E values: 0 to 2.0x10−7 and %ID from 100 to 56.25) (Table S2). In fact, the query that yielded the CcBV protein was better matched to a eukaryotic ribonuclease (%ID: 26.06%, E-value 1.14x10−16, query coverage: 84%) (Table S2). These results suggest that MSEV sequence similarities with PDV proteins may not be significant.

We also searched the _Lh_ MSEV superset for presence of _L. boulardi_ Filamentous Virus (LbFV) homologs (LbFV is a behavior manipulating virus of _Lb_ ([Varaldi _et al._ 2006](#bib88); [Patot _et al._ 2012](#bib72))). Of LbFV’s 108 genes, 13 are present in genomes of _Lb_, _Lh_ and related species, and the 13 transcripts are expressed in the _Lb_ venom gland ([Di Giovanni _et al._ 2019](#bib16)). Within our thresholds, we obtained only three (of 13) sequences with similarity to LbFV ORFs. However, these three _Lh_ MSEV proteins, with hits for LbFV sequences obtained better scoring hits in the unrestricted nr database, suggesting that the _Lh_ MSEV proteins are not highly related to the LbFV proteins (Table S2).

When comparing MSEV proteins to the entirety of Viridae, a total of 35 MSEV proteins had hits with %IDs ranging from 30 to 71% and E-values ranging from 1.0x10−22 to 1.0x10−178 (Table S2). However, a BLASTp search against the entire nr database found that proteins with results for viral hits had better scores when searched against the entire nr database, indicating that while viral hits are possible, they are not the best match (Table S2). This result, in addition to the fact that 372 other MSEV proteins (including the Diedel and Enhancin (Table S1)) did not return viral hits, would indicate that a majority of MSEV proteins are not closely related to viral proteins.

### The whole-body transcriptome contains expressed MSEV transcripts

We performed a mixed-gender whole-body transcriptome sequencing and _de novo_ assembly of _Lh_ transcripts. This assembly generated 104,066 transcripts. This dataset is more than three times larger than the published data derived from abdomens of female wasps that has 31,400 transcripts ([Goecks _et al._ 2013](#bib27)). A BLAST analysis of the female abdominal transcripts against the male/female whole-body transcripts showed that a majority (21,493/31,400, 68.4%) were present in the latter data set.

We searched the whole-body transcriptome for MSEV protein coding sequences using tBLASTn. Of 407 MSEV superset proteins, we identified transcripts for 371 (91.1%) proteins. Despite the ∼9% discrepancy (likely due to differences in expression levels due to different experimental conditions), these results largely verify the transcript data from ([Goecks _et al._ 2013](#bib27)) that we have based our proteomic analyses on. Of the 371 MSEV transcripts identified, 233 (63%) encode Class 1, 44 (12%) encode Class 2, and 94/371 (25%) encode Class 3 proteins.

### Assembly of the Lh genome

We separately sequenced _Lh_ 14 male and female genomic DNA and assembled the paired-end reads _de novo_, using ABySS ([Jackman _et al._ 2017](#bib37)). These assemblies have a modest scaffold N50 of 4,800 with more than 100,000 scaffolds and an average coverage of 87% ([Table 2](#t2)). Assembly with MaSurCa ([Zimin _et al._ 2013](#bib97)) provided similar results (data not shown), indicating that our assembly quality is limited likely due to factors such as large genome size and repetitive sequence regions ([Dominguez Del Angel _et al._ 2018](#bib18)). Although the N50 values and large number of scaffolds indicate that the genome is not highly assembled, we found at least 80% of BUSCOs shared in the Insecta set in both assemblies ([Table 2](#t2), BUSCOs in Table S3).

#### Table 2. Assembly statistics: Statistics of male, female, and combined (male plus female) _Lh_ genomes as assessed by QUASTv4.0 and BUSCOv9.0. Percent coverage was found by mapping sequencing reads back to assembly using HISAT2. The identified BUSCOs can be found in Table S1. The QUAST program was run with parameters set for eukaryotic genomes and scaffolds. The BUSCO program was run with species set to ‘Nasonia.’ Contigs smaller than 500 bp were excluded.


| ASSEMBLY STATISTICS |
| --- |
|  |  | Male | Female | Joint |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Assembly | N50 (bp) | **4,779** | **4,843** | **11906** |
| No. scaffolds | **147,558** | **147,549** | **83,487** |
| Largest scaffold (bp) | **306,667** | **176,371** | **375,275** |
| Total length (bp) | **474,383,205** | **472,302,230** | **462,564,754** |
| GC% | **27.54** | **27.28** | **27.84** |
| Coverage (%) | **87.7** | **86.8** | **91.1** |
| BUSCOs (Insecta) | Complete | **80.2%** | **81.3%** | **90.9%** |
| Single | **69.4%** | **71.8%** | **89.2%** |
| Duplicated | **10.8%** | **9.5%** | **1.7%** |
| Fragmented | **15.9%** | **15.1%** | **6.5%** |
| Missing | **3.9%** | **3.6%** | **2.6%** |
| n | **1658** | **1658** | **1658** |

While still fragmented, a _de novo_ joint assembly of male and female sequences using Platanus-allee and AGOUTI improved assembly and scaffolding statistics (N50: 11,906, average coverage 91%). The number of found BUSCOs in the joint assembly rose to 90% ([Table 2](#t2), BUSCOs in Table S3).

Analysis of K-mer multiplicity _vs._ GC content in the genome sequencing reads using the K-mer analysis tool, KAT ([Mapleson _et al._ 2016](#bib57)) showed three possible clusters, although they are difficult to distinguish ([Figure 2A](#fig2)). Cluster 1 has high multiplicity (450-650), Cluster 2 has lower multiplicity and a wide range of GC content, and Cluster 3 has the lowest multiplicity and the highest GC content. Cluster 3 overlaps with Cluster 2 making them hard to fully separate. BLAST searches of a random sample (1,672/4,482) from Cluster 1 contigs hit insect homologs 73% (1,220/1,672) of the time, _Acetobacter_ homologs 13% (216/1,672) of the time, and then a variety of mostly Eukaryotic hits. Cluster 2 represents a majority of the wasp genome (>94%), and blast hits of a random sample (316/68,173) of its contigs almost exclusively had homologs in Hymenoptera (311/316; 98%) and mostly in _L. heterotoma_ (227/316; 71%). Cluster 3 is the smallest of the three and contigs from Cluster 3 had homologs exclusively in _Acetobacter_ (110/110). There was no evidence for contamination from a viral source or discrete MSEV-specific set of nucleic acid sequence.

Furthermore, K-mer multiplicity _vs._ GC content for the joint assembly of the _Lh 14_ genome ([Figure 2B](#fig2)) showed a very similar heat map to that using the published assembly of _L. clavipes_ ([Figure 2C](#fig2); Bioproject: PRJNA84205 ([Kraaijeveld _et al._ 2016](#bib49))). The two genomes have highly similar 27-mer/GC profiles that do not differ statistically (multivariate Cramér test statistic = 114,119, _P_ = 0.73, number bootstrap-replicates = 1000). The _L. heterotoma_ assembly has 27-mers with approximately twice the multiplicity of those found in _L. clavipes_, which may represent increased repeat content in _L. heterotoma_ and is supported by an assembly size over 200 Mb larger than the _L. clavipes_ genome (463 Mb _vs._ 255 Mb) ([Kraaijeveld _et al._ 2016](#bib49)).

### MSEV genes are encoded in the wasp genome

Using our annotation pipeline, 28,481 predicted genes were annotated. Within the annotated genes, we found 8 genes for the body color _yellow_, 3 _major royal jelly protein_ (_mrjp_) genes, 25 odorant receptor/odorant binding protein coding genes, and 94 gene predictions for _cytochrome P450_. Some of these nuclear genes are not only involved in development and cellular processes, but are also included in the MSEV proteome (Table S1 and ([Heavner _et al._ 2017](#bib35))). A search of gene predictions for MSEV proteins via tBLASTn identified 325 of 407 (80%) MSEV sequences ([Table 3](#t3)). Of these, 153/407 (38%) had a percent identity of 95% or greater. Presence or removal of scaffolds with bacterial DNA sequences from either the separate male/female or the joint assembly did not affect this number, supporting the nuclear location of a majority of the MSEV genes.

#### Table 3. MSEV genes found in scaffolds and predictions: Gene predictions from genome assembly scaffolds and AUGUSTUS gene predictions were searched for MSEV genes using tBLASTn. Results better than %ID >70%, E-value < 1x10−50, and query coverage > 70% were retained.


| MSEV GENES FOUND IN GENOME ANALYSIS |
| --- |
|  | MSEV BLASTn scaffold results | AUGUSTUS prediction results |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Found | Percentage | Found | Percentage |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Female | **278** | **68.3** | **169** | **41.5** |
| Male | **275** | **67.6** | **166** | **40.8** |
| Shared in M+F | **265** |  | **159** |  |
| Joint Assembly | **375** | **92.1%** | **325** | **79.9%** |

As gene prediction software can potentially miss genes ([Wang _et al._ 2004](#bib91)), we searched the genomic scaffolds directly for MSEV-coding sequence regions using known protein sequences as queries via tBLASTn before and after removal of bacterial sequences. In both cases, 375/407 (92%) MSEV sequences were at least 70% complete as determined by query coverage ([Table 3](#t3)). Of these, 191/407 (47%) had a percent identity of 95% or greater.

The scaffolds containing MSEV genes (Fig. S1A) were also compared to a random subset of scaffolds without MSEV genes (Fig S1B) for their 27-mer/GC profiles. These appeared to not differ statistically (multivariate Cramér test statistic = 3755, _P_ = 0.80, number bootstrap-replicates = 1000), indicating that the MSEV genes lie on scaffolds that resemble the rest of the genome.

### Characterization of select MSEV genes

We spot checked small portions of the genome for gene structure predictions of MSEV virulence protein genes _SmGTPse01_ (Class 2) and _p40_ (Class 3). For this, we sequenced PCR products of gDNA corresponding to these genes.

The MSEV SmGTPase01 has prokaryotic-like GTPase domains and its gene is expected to lack introns ([Heavner _et al._ 2017](#bib35)). The predicted _SmGTPase01_ CDS spans 936 bp, which contains the functional GTPase domain ([Heavner 2018](#bib32)). Scaffolds from male and female genomes confirmed the absence of coding region introns (data not shown). We hypothesized that primers in 5′ and 3′ untranslated regions (UTRs) should amplify the exact fragment from cDNA/gDNA as template based on manual characterization of the _SmGTPase01_ locus ([Heavner 2018](#bib32)) ([Figure 3A](#fig3)). This prediction was borne out and we amplified an 873 bp fragment only from female cDNA and from both male and female gDNA ([Figure 3C](#fig3)). The sequenced PCR products were identical to corresponding sequence within the assembly and the published transcript sequence from Goecks _et al._ (data not shown).

The _p40_ gene encodes a protein that is structurally similar to T3SS bacterial needle-tip proteins IpaD/SipD from _Shigella_ and _Salmonella_. However, _p40_’s genomic sequence is expected to have introns ([Heavner _et al._ 2017](#bib35)). The full p40 gene was computationally assembled and predicted within both male and female genomes. Primers designed for _p40_’s 5′ and 3′ UTRs ([Goecks _et al._ 2013](#bib27); [Ramroop 2016](#bib75)) ([Figure 3B](#fig3)), allowed amplification of _p40_’s 939 bp cDNA only in preparations from female wasp extracts, but gDNA bands at 1,630 bp were detected from reactions when either male or female genome was used as template, indicating the presence of introns ([Figure 3D](#fig3)). Sequencing the cloned cDNA product from females confirmed the published cDNA sequence ([Heavner _et al._, 2017](#bib35)). We also cloned and sequenced the gDNA products from male and female wasps and found the sequences to be identical (data not shown).

Unlike the well-characterized _Drosophila_ hosts, the biology and molecular-genetics of their parasitic wasps have remained relatively obscure with only recent characterizations of _Leptopilina_ and _Ganaspis_ spp. ([Melk and Govind 1999](#bib60); [Colinet _et al._ 2013](#bib12); [Goecks _et al._ 2013](#bib27); [Heavner _et al._ 2013](#bib33); [Mortimer _et al._ 2013](#bib64); [Heavner _et al._ 2017](#bib35); [Di Giovanni _et al._ 2019](#bib16)). Our proteomic, transcriptomic and genomic results here expand the available information on _L. heterotoma_. Bioinformatics analysis of the additional MSEV proteins does not alter the initial interpretation of the original 161 proteins. Genomic sequencing and analysis of scaffolds reveals that more than 92% of the MSEV genes reside on the wasp genome. We did not find evidence for MSEV gene association with endosymbiont or commensal bacterial DNA. We suspect that the remaining ∼8% are also nuclear genes and this association will be confirmed in higher quality assemblies. Altogether, these results strongly suggest that, like other subcellular structures, MSEVs are encoded in the wasp nuclear genome.

The cellular nature of _Lh_ vesicles is likely to be shared by closely related _Lv_ and _Lb_ wasps. Our previous work has shown that the overall morphologies of _Lh_ and _Lv_ MSEVs are similar ([Morales _et al._ 2005](#bib63); [Chiu _et al._ 2006](#bib10)). However, this is not the case for _Lb_ MSEVs; different _Lb_ strains have varying MSEV morphologies ([Dupas _et al._ 1996](#bib20); [Gueguen _et al._ 2011](#bib30); [Wan _et al._ 2019](#bib90)). Interpretation of their identity also varies. For example, [Di Giovanni _et al._ (2019](#bib16)) contend that MSEVs/VLPs are derived from a virus ancestral to the LbFV. Our analysis of the expanded proteomic superset does not lend strong support to this line of thinking.

We did not find convincing evidence of PDV or other viral structural proteins in the _Lh_ MSEV proteome. However, we cannot discount that MSEVs have a viral origin as our analysis is limited by the fragmentation of the genome. It is also possible that a virus related to MSEVs may not have been identified to date. Mechanistically, eukaryotic viruses and vesicles share cellular pathways involving the endomembrane systems of their cells of origin or their target cells (Nolte-‘t Hoen _et al._ 2016), leading to overlap in protein functionality, but not necessarily origin. Thus, at least some of the Class 1 proteins in the MSEV proteome may be central to MSEV biogenesis in the wasp or for their interactions with the host hemocytes’ endomembrane machinery despite potentially being related to viruses. It is noteworthy that energy metabolism genes appear to be involved in rapid speciation and adaptation to new environments ([Gershoni _et al._ 2009](#bib26); [Lane 2009](#bib52)), raising the possibility that MSEV mitochondrial proteins might contribute to this process. How _Lh_ MSEVs are functionally similar to other insect or mammalian EVs remains to be explored experimentally. Functional characterization of predicted infection and immunity Class 2 proteins should explain the immune-suppressive strategies of these wasps. RNA interference, infection assays, and other experimental strategies should make this line of inquiry feasible.

Functional assignments are difficult for the unannotated Class 3 proteins. These are likely to be quite interesting, due to their different expression profiles in _Lh_ _vs._ _Lb_ and _G. hookeri_ species. This difference in expression may stem either from _cis_ changes in their regulatory sequences, or from absence of these genes in the _Lb_ or _G. hookeri_ genomes. Recent comparative genomics analysis has shown that over 40% of venom genes in the closely-related species _N. vitripennis_ and _N. giraulti_ have diverged significantly and up to 25% of venom genes are specific to a species ([Martinson _et al._ 2017](#bib59)). A proteomic analysis of the venom genes of _Leptopilina spp_. and a molecular understanding of their expression will provide insights into how key activities within MSEVs evolved to parasitize the range of fruit fly hosts.

A key question regarding _Lh_ virulence proteins critical to wasp success is whether their genes reside in a discrete region of the genome like a “virulence island” found in some microbial genomes ([Dobrindt _et al._ 2004](#bib17); [Gal-Mor and Finlay 2006](#bib23)), or whether some genes are dispersed within the genome, while others occur in one or more clusters as in wasps with PDVs ([Volkoff _et al._ 2010](#bib89); [Pichon _et al._ 2015](#bib73)). More complete assemblies, scaffolded to the level of chromosomes, will describe the genome-wide distribution of these genes in _Lh_ and related wasps. Key MSEV genes could serve as genetic markers in future studies. Comparative genomics will uncover additional gene family members of MSEV proteins in other _Leptopilina_ wasps and enable the development of new functional genomics tools such as CRISPR-disrupted mutant alleles made in _N. vitripennis_ ([Werren _et al._ 2009](#bib94); [Siebert _et al._ 2015](#bib79); [Li _et al._ 2017b](#bib55); [Li _et al._ 2017a](#bib54)). These approaches will open new avenues for understanding the biology of this host-parasite model.

## Acknowledgments

We thank Drs. W. Qiu and S. Singh, and J. Chou for discussions and critical comments, and our reviewers for insightful feedback. We are grateful to A. Corvelo at the New York Genome Center for help with genome assemblies. Bioinformatics work was conducted in-house and with the BIOMIX Shared Computing Cluster at Delaware Biotechnology Institute, University of Delaware. This work was supported by grants from NASA (NNX15AB42G), NSF (IOS-1121817), NIH (1F31GM111052-01A1, 5G12MD007603-30, and GM103446).

## Footnotes

Communicating editor: H. Salz

## Literature Cited

1.  Almagro Armenteros J. J., Tsirigos K. D., Sonderby C. K., Petersen T. N., Winther O. et al. , 2019.  SignalP 5.0 improves signal peptide predictions using deep neural networks. Nat. Biotechnol. 37: 420–423. 10.1038/s41587-019-0036-z \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-019-0036-z)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30778233/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat.%20Biotechnol.&title=SignalP%205.0%20improves%20signal%20peptide%20predictions%20using%20deep%20neural%20networks.&author=J.%20J.%20Almagro%20Armenteros&author=K.%20D.%20Tsirigos&author=C.%20K.%20Sonderby&author=T.%20N.%20Petersen&author=O.%20Winther&volume=37&publication_year=2019&pages=420-423&pmid=30778233&doi=10.1038/s41587-019-0036-z&)\]
2.  Altschul S. F., Gish W., Miller W., Myers E. W., and Lipman D. J., 1990.  Basic local alignment search tool. J. Mol. Biol. 215: 403–410. 10.1016/S0022-2836(05)80360-2 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-2836\(05\)80360-2)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2231712/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Mol.%20Biol.&title=Basic%20local%20alignment%20search%20tool.&author=S.%20F.%20Altschul&author=W.%20Gish&author=W.%20Miller&author=E.%20W.%20Myers&author=D.%20J.%20Lipman&volume=215&publication_year=1990&pages=403-410&pmid=2231712&doi=10.1016/S0022-2836\(05\)80360-2&)\]
3.  Ashburner M., Ball C. A., Blake J. A., Botstein D., Butler H. et al. , 2000.  Gene ontology: tool for the unification of biology. The Gene Ontology Consortium. Nat. Genet. 25: 25–29. 10.1038/75556 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/75556)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3037419/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10802651/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat.%20Genet.&title=Gene%20ontology:%20tool%20for%20the%20unification%20of%20biology.%20The%20Gene%20Ontology%20Consortium.&author=M.%20Ashburner&author=C.%20A.%20Ball&author=J.%20A.%20Blake&author=D.%20Botstein&author=H.%20Butler&volume=25&publication_year=2000&pages=25-29&pmid=10802651&doi=10.1038/75556&)\]
4.  Baringhaus, L., and C. Franz, 2004 On a new multivariate two-sample test. 88: 190–206.
5.  Buchfink B., Xie C., and Huson D. H., 2015.  Fast and sensitive protein alignment using DIAMOND. Nat. Methods 12: 59–60. 10.1038/nmeth.3176 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.3176)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25402007/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat.%20Methods&title=Fast%20and%20sensitive%20protein%20alignment%20using%20DIAMOND.&author=B.%20Buchfink&author=C.%20Xie&author=D.%20H.%20Huson&volume=12&publication_year=2015&pages=59-60&pmid=25402007&doi=10.1038/nmeth.3176&)\]
6.  Burke G. R., Simmonds T. J., Sharanowski B. J., and Geib S. M., 2018.  Rapid viral symbiogenesis via changes in parasitoid wasp genome architecture. Mol. Biol. Evol. 35: 2463–2474. 10.1093/molbev/msy148 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msy148)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30053110/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol.%20Biol.%20Evol.&title=Rapid%20viral%20symbiogenesis%20via%20changes%20in%20parasitoid%20wasp%20genome%20architecture.&author=G.%20R.%20Burke&author=T.%20J.%20Simmonds&author=B.%20J.%20Sharanowski&author=S.%20M.%20Geib&volume=35&publication_year=2018&pages=2463-2474&pmid=30053110&doi=10.1093/molbev/msy148&)\]
7.  Camacho C., Coulouris G., Avagyan V., Ma N., Papadopoulos J. et al. , 2009.  BLAST+: architecture and applications. BMC Bioinformatics 10: 421 10.1186/1471-2105-10-421 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-10-421)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2803857/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20003500/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=BMC%20Bioinformatics&title=BLAST+:%20architecture%20and%20applications.&author=C.%20Camacho&author=G.%20Coulouris&author=V.%20Avagyan&author=N.%20Ma&author=J.%20Papadopoulos&volume=10&publication_year=2009&pages=421&pmid=20003500&doi=10.1186/1471-2105-10-421&)\]
8.  Chiu H., and Govind S., 2002.  Natural infection of D. melanogaster by virulent parasitic wasps induces apoptotic depletion of hematopoietic precursors. Cell Death Differ. 9: 1379–1381. 10.1038/sj.cdd.4401134 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.cdd.4401134)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12478476/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell%20Death%20Differ.&title=Natural%20infection%20of%20D.%20melanogaster%20by%20virulent%20parasitic%20wasps%20induces%20apoptotic%20depletion%20of%20hematopoietic%20precursors.&author=H.%20Chiu&author=S.%20Govind&volume=9&publication_year=2002&pages=1379-1381&pmid=12478476&doi=10.1038/sj.cdd.4401134&)\]
9.  Chiu H., Morales J., and Govind S., 2006.  Identification and immuno-electron microscopy localization of p40, a protein component of immunosuppressive virus-like particles from Leptopilina heterotoma, a virulent parasitoid wasp of Drosophila. J. Gen. Virol. 87: 461–470. 10.1099/vir.0.81474-0 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1099/vir.0.81474-0)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2705942/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16432035/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Gen.%20Virol.&title=Identification%20and%20immuno-electron%20microscopy%20localization%20of%20p40,%20a%20protein%20component%20of%20immunosuppressive%20virus-like%20particles%20from%20Leptopilina%20heterotoma,%20a%20virulent%20parasitoid%20wasp%20of%20Drosophila.&author=H.%20Chiu&author=J.%20Morales&author=S.%20Govind&volume=87&publication_year=2006&pages=461-470&pmid=16432035&doi=10.1099/vir.0.81474-0&)\]
10.  Cock P. J. A., Antao T., Chang J. T., Chapman B. A., Cox C. J. et al. , 2009.  Biopython: freely available Python tools for computational molecular biology and bioinformatics. Bioinformatics 25: 1422–1423. 10.1093/bioinformatics/btp163 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btp163)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2682512/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19304878/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bioinformatics&title=Biopython:%20freely%20available%20Python%20tools%20for%20computational%20molecular%20biology%20and%20bioinformatics.&author=P.%20J.%20A.%20Cock&author=T.%20Antao&author=J.%20T.%20Chang&author=B.%20A.%20Chapman&author=C.%20J.%20Cox&volume=25&publication_year=2009&pages=1422-1423&pmid=19304878&doi=10.1093/bioinformatics/btp163&)\]
11.  Colinet D., Deleury E., Anselme C., Cazes D., Poulain J. et al. , 2013.  Extensive inter- and intraspecific venom variation in closely related parasites targeting the same host: the case of Leptopilina parasitoids of Drosophila. Insect Biochem. Mol. Biol. 43: 601–611. 10.1016/j.ibmb.2013.03.010 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ibmb.2013.03.010)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23557852/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Insect%20Biochem.%20Mol.%20Biol.&title=Extensive%20inter-%20and%20intraspecific%20venom%20variation%20in%20closely%20related%20parasites%20targeting%20the%20same%20host:%20the%20case%20of%20Leptopilina%20parasitoids%20of%20Drosophila.&author=D.%20Colinet&author=E.%20Deleury&author=C.%20Anselme&author=D.%20Cazes&author=J.%20Poulain&volume=43&publication_year=2013&pages=601-611&pmid=23557852&doi=10.1016/j.ibmb.2013.03.010&)\]
12.  Conesa A., Götz S., García-Gómez J. M., Terol J., Talón M. et al. , 2005.  Blast2GO: a universal tool for annotation, visualization and analysis in functional genomics research. Bioinformatics 21: 3674–3676. 10.1093/bioinformatics/bti610 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bti610)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16081474/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bioinformatics&title=Blast2GO:%20a%20universal%20tool%20for%20annotation,%20visualization%20and%20analysis%20in%20functional%20genomics%20research.&author=A.%20Conesa&author=S.%20G%C3%B6tz&author=J.%20M.%20Garc%C3%ADa-G%C3%B3mez&author=J.%20Terol&author=M.%20Tal%C3%B3n&volume=21&publication_year=2005&pages=3674-3676&pmid=16081474&doi=10.1093/bioinformatics/bti610&)\]
13.  Crotti E., Rizzi A., Chouaia B., Ricci I., Favia G. et al. , 2010.  Acetic acid bacteria, newly emerging symbionts of insects. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 76: 6963–6970. 10.1128/AEM.01336-10 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.01336-10)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2976266/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20851977/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Appl.%20Environ.%20Microbiol.&title=Acetic%20acid%20bacteria,%20newly%20emerging%20symbionts%20of%20insects.&author=E.%20Crotti&author=A.%20Rizzi&author=B.%20Chouaia&author=I.%20Ricci&author=G.%20Favia&volume=76&publication_year=2010&pages=6963-6970&pmid=20851977&doi=10.1128/AEM.01336-10&)\]
14.  Di Giovanni D., Lepetit D., Boulesteix M., Couté Y., Ravallec M. et al. , 2019.  A behavior-manipulating virus relative as a source of adaptive genes for parasitoid wasps. bioRxiv: 1–37. 10.1101/342758 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/342758)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32080746/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=bioRxiv&title=A%20behavior-manipulating%20virus%20relative%20as%20a%20source%20of%20adaptive%20genes%20for%20parasitoid%20wasps.&author=D.%20Di%20Giovanni&author=D.%20Lepetit&author=M.%20Boulesteix&author=Y.%20Cout%C3%A9&author=M.%20Ravallec&publication_year=2019&pages=1-37&pmid=32080746&doi=10.1101/342758&)\]
15.  Dobrindt U., Hochhut B., Hentschel U., and Hacker J., 2004.  Genomic islands in pathogenic and environmental microorganisms. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2: 414–424. 10.1038/nrmicro884 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrmicro884)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15100694/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat.%20Rev.%20Microbiol.&title=Genomic%20islands%20in%20pathogenic%20and%20environmental%20microorganisms.&author=U.%20Dobrindt&author=B.%20Hochhut&author=U.%20Hentschel&author=J.%20Hacker&volume=2&publication_year=2004&pages=414-424&pmid=15100694&doi=10.1038/nrmicro884&)\]
16.  Dominguez Del Angel V., Hjerde E., Sterck L., Capella-Gutierrez S., Notredame C. et al. , 2018.  Ten steps to get started in Genome Assembly and Annotation. F1000 Res. 7: 1–18. 10.12688/f1000research.13598.1 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.13598.1)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5850084/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29568489/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=F1000%20Res.&title=Ten%20steps%20to%20get%20started%20in%20Genome%20Assembly%20and%20Annotation.&author=V.%20Dominguez%20Del%20Angel&author=E.%20Hjerde&author=L.%20Sterck&author=S.%20Capella-Gutierrez&author=C.%20Notredame&volume=7&publication_year=2018&pages=1-18&pmid=29568489&doi=10.12688/f1000research.13598.1&)\]
17.  Drezen J. M., Leobold M., Bezier A., Huguet E., Volkoff A. N. et al. , 2017.  Endogenous viruses of parasitic wasps: variations on a common theme. Curr. Opin. Virol. 25: 41–48. 10.1016/j.coviro.2017.07.002 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coviro.2017.07.002)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28728099/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr.%20Opin.%20Virol.&title=Endogenous%20viruses%20of%20parasitic%20wasps:%20variations%20on%20a%20common%20theme.&author=J.%20M.%20Drezen&author=M.%20Leobold&author=A.%20Bezier&author=E.%20Huguet&author=A.%20N.%20Volkoff&volume=25&publication_year=2017&pages=41-48&pmid=28728099&doi=10.1016/j.coviro.2017.07.002&)\]
18.  Dupas S., Brehelin M., Frey F., and Carton Y., 1996.  Immune suppressive virus-like particles in a Drosophila parasitoid: significance of their intraspecific morphological variations. Parasitology 113: 207–212. 10.1017/S0031182000081981 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0031182000081981)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8811846/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Parasitology&title=Immune%20suppressive%20virus-like%20particles%20in%20a%20Drosophila%20parasitoid:%20significance%20of%20their%20intraspecific%20morphological%20variations.&author=S.%20Dupas&author=M.%20Brehelin&author=F.%20Frey&author=Y.%20Carton&volume=113&publication_year=1996&pages=207-212&pmid=8811846&doi=10.1017/S0031182000081981&)\]
19.  Engel P., and Moran N. A., 2013.  The gut microbiota of insects - diversity in structure and function. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 37: 699–735. 10.1111/1574-6976.12025 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/1574-6976.12025)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23692388/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=FEMS%20Microbiol.%20Rev.&title=The%20gut%20microbiota%20of%20insects%20-%20diversity%20in%20structure%20and%20function.&author=P.%20Engel&author=N.%20A.%20Moran&volume=37&publication_year=2013&pages=699-735&pmid=23692388&doi=10.1111/1574-6976.12025&)\]
20.  Franz, C., 2019 Cramer: Multivariate nonparametric cramer-test for the two-sample-problem. R package version 0.9–3. [https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=cramer](https://cran.r-project.org/package=cramer).
21.  Gal-Mor O., and Finlay B. B., 2006.  Pathogenicity islands: a molecular toolbox for bacterial virulence. Cell. Microbiol. 8: 1707–1719. 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2006.00794.x \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1462-5822.2006.00794.x)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16939533/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell.%20Microbiol.&title=Pathogenicity%20islands:%20a%20molecular%20toolbox%20for%20bacterial%20virulence.&author=O.%20Gal-Mor&author=B.%20B.%20Finlay&volume=8&publication_year=2006&pages=1707-1719&pmid=16939533&doi=10.1111/j.1462-5822.2006.00794.x&)\]
22.  Gauthier J., Drezen J. M., and Herniou E. A., 2018.  The recurrent domestication of viruses: major evolutionary transitions in parasitic wasps. Parasitology 145: 713–723. 10.1017/S0031182017000725 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0031182017000725)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28534452/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Parasitology&title=The%20recurrent%20domestication%20of%20viruses:%20major%20evolutionary%20transitions%20in%20parasitic%20wasps.&author=J.%20Gauthier&author=J.%20M.%20Drezen&author=E.%20A.%20Herniou&volume=145&publication_year=2018&pages=713-723&pmid=28534452&doi=10.1017/S0031182017000725&)\]
23.  Gendler S. J., and Spicer A. P., 1995.  Epithelial mucin genes. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 57: 607–634. 10.1146/annurev.ph.57.030195.003135 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.ph.57.030195.003135)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7778880/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Annu.%20Rev.%20Physiol.&title=Epithelial%20mucin%20genes.&author=S.%20J.%20Gendler&author=A.%20P.%20Spicer&volume=57&publication_year=1995&pages=607-634&pmid=7778880&doi=10.1146/annurev.ph.57.030195.003135&)\]
24.  Gershoni M., Templeton A. R., and Mishmar D., 2009.  Mitochondrial bioenergetics as a major motive force of speciation. BioEssays 31: 642–650. 10.1002/bies.200800139 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/bies.200800139)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19408245/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=BioEssays&title=Mitochondrial%20bioenergetics%20as%20a%20major%20motive%20force%20of%20speciation.&author=M.%20Gershoni&author=A.%20R.%20Templeton&author=D.%20Mishmar&volume=31&publication_year=2009&pages=642-650&pmid=19408245&doi=10.1002/bies.200800139&)\]
25.  Goecks J., Mortimer N. T., Mobley J. A., Bowersock G. J., Taylor J. et al. , 2013.  Integrative approach reveals composition of endoparasitoid wasp venoms. PLoS One 8: e64125 10.1371/journal.pone.0064125 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0064125)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3662768/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23717546/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20One&title=Integrative%20approach%20reveals%20composition%20of%20endoparasitoid%20wasp%20venoms.&author=J.%20Goecks&author=N.%20T.%20Mortimer&author=J.%20A.%20Mobley&author=G.%20J.%20Bowersock&author=J.%20Taylor&volume=8&publication_year=2013&pages=e64125&pmid=23717546&doi=10.1371/journal.pone.0064125&)\]
26.  Grabherr M. G., Haas B. J., Yassour M., Levin J. Z., Thompson D. A. et al. , 2011.  Full-length transcriptome assembly from RNA-Seq data without a reference genome. Nat. Biotechnol. 29: 644–652. 10.1038/nbt.1883 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.1883)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3571712/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21572440/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat.%20Biotechnol.&title=Full-length%20transcriptome%20assembly%20from%20RNA-Seq%20data%20without%20a%20reference%20genome.&author=M.%20G.%20Grabherr&author=B.%20J.%20Haas&author=M.%20Yassour&author=J.%20Z.%20Levin&author=D.%20A.%20Thompson&volume=29&publication_year=2011&pages=644-652&pmid=21572440&doi=10.1038/nbt.1883&)\]
27.  Gueguen G., Onemola B., and Govind S., 2012.  Association of a new Wolbachia strain with, and its effects on, Leptopilina victoriae, a virulent wasp parasitic to Drosophila spp. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 78: 5962–5966. 10.1128/AEM.01058-12 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.01058-12)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3406139/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22685158/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Appl.%20Environ.%20Microbiol.&title=Association%20of%20a%20new%20Wolbachia%20strain%20with,%20and%20its%20effects%20on,%20Leptopilina%20victoriae,%20a%20virulent%20wasp%20parasitic%20to%20Drosophila%20spp.&author=G.%20Gueguen&author=B.%20Onemola&author=S.%20Govind&volume=78&publication_year=2012&pages=5962-5966&pmid=22685158&doi=10.1128/AEM.01058-12&)\]
28.  Gueguen G., Rajwani R., Paddibhatla I., Morales J., and Govind S., 2011.  VLPs of Leptopilina boulardi share biogenesis and overall stellate morphology with VLPs of the heterotoma clade. Virus Res. 160: 159–165. 10.1016/j.virusres.2011.06.005 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.virusres.2011.06.005)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3905611/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21704090/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Virus%20Res.&title=VLPs%20of%20Leptopilina%20boulardi%20share%20biogenesis%20and%20overall%20stellate%20morphology%20with%20VLPs%20of%20the%20heterotoma%20clade.&author=G.%20Gueguen&author=R.%20Rajwani&author=I.%20Paddibhatla&author=J.%20Morales&author=S.%20Govind&volume=160&publication_year=2011&pages=159-165&pmid=21704090&doi=10.1016/j.virusres.2011.06.005&)\]
29.  Götz S., García-Gómez J. M., Terol J., Williams T. D., Nagaraj S. H. et al. , 2008.  High-throughput functional annotation and data mining with the Blast2GO suite. Nucleic Acids Res. 36: 3420–3435. 10.1093/nar/gkn176 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkn176)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2425479/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18445632/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nucleic%20Acids%20Res.&title=High-throughput%20functional%20annotation%20and%20data%20mining%20with%20the%20Blast2GO%20suite.&author=S.%20G%C3%B6tz&author=J.%20M.%20Garc%C3%ADa-G%C3%B3mez&author=J.%20Terol&author=T.%20D.%20Williams&author=S.%20H.%20Nagaraj&volume=36&publication_year=2008&pages=3420-3435&pmid=18445632&doi=10.1093/nar/gkn176&)\]
30.  Heavner M. E., 2018.  Evidence for organelle-like extracellular vesicles from a parasite of Drosophila and their function in suppressing host immunity, pp. 236 in Biochemistry. City University of New York, Graduate Center; [https://academicworks.cuny.edu/gc\_etds/2585](https://academicworks.cuny.edu/gc_etds/2585) \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Biochemistry&author=M.%20E.%20Heavner&publication_year=2018&)\]
31.  Heavner M. E., Gueguen G., Rajwani R., Pagan P. E., Small C. et al. , 2013.  Partial venom gland transcriptome of a Drosophila parasitoid wasp, Leptopilina heterotoma, reveals novel and shared bioactive profiles with stinging Hymenoptera. Gene 526: 195–204. 10.1016/j.gene.2013.04.080 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gene.2013.04.080)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3905606/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23688557/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Gene&title=Partial%20venom%20gland%20transcriptome%20of%20a%20Drosophila%20parasitoid%20wasp,%20Leptopilina%20heterotoma,%20reveals%20novel%20and%20shared%20bioactive%20profiles%20with%20stinging%20Hymenoptera.&author=M.%20E.%20Heavner&author=G.%20Gueguen&author=R.%20Rajwani&author=P.%20E.%20Pagan&author=C.%20Small&volume=526&publication_year=2013&pages=195-204&pmid=23688557&doi=10.1016/j.gene.2013.04.080&)\]
32.  Heavner M. E., Hudgins A. D., Rajwani R., Morales J., and Govind S., 2014.  Harnessing the natural D_rosophila_\-parasitoid model for integrating insect immunity with functional venomics. Curr. Opin. Insect Sci. 6: 61–67. 10.1016/j.cois.2014.09.016 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cois.2014.09.016)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4309977/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25642411/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr.%20Opin.%20Insect%20Sci.&title=Harnessing%20the%20natural%20Drosophila-parasitoid%20model%20for%20integrating%20insect%20immunity%20with%20functional%20venomics.&author=M.%20E.%20Heavner&author=A.%20D.%20Hudgins&author=R.%20Rajwani&author=J.%20Morales&author=S.%20Govind&volume=6&publication_year=2014&pages=61-67&pmid=25642411&doi=10.1016/j.cois.2014.09.016&)\]
33.  Heavner M. E., Ramroop J., Gueguen G., Ramrattan G., Dolios G. et al. , 2017.  Novel organelles with elements of bacterial and eukaryotic secretion systems weaponize parasites of Drosophila. Curr. Biol. 27: 2869–2877. 10.1016/j.cub.2017.08.019 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2017.08.019)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5659752/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28889977/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr.%20Biol.&title=Novel%20organelles%20with%20elements%20of%20bacterial%20and%20eukaryotic%20secretion%20systems%20weaponize%20parasites%20of%20Drosophila.&author=M.%20E.%20Heavner&author=J.%20Ramroop&author=G.%20Gueguen&author=G.%20Ramrattan&author=G.%20Dolios&volume=27&publication_year=2017&pages=2869-2877&pmid=28889977&doi=10.1016/j.cub.2017.08.019&)\]
34.  Ihaka R., and Gentleman R., 1996.  R: A Language for data analysis and graphics. J. Comput. Graph. Stat. 5: 299–314. \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Comput.%20Graph.%20Stat.&title=R:%20A%20Language%20for%20data%20analysis%20and%20graphics.&author=R.%20Ihaka&author=R.%20Gentleman&volume=5&publication_year=1996&pages=299-314&)\]
35.  Jackman S. D., Vandervalk B. P., Mohamadi H., Chu J., Yeo S. et al. , 2017.  ABySS 2.0: resource-efficient assembly of large genomes using a Bloom filter. Genome Res. 27: 768–777. 10.1101/gr.214346.116 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.214346.116)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5411771/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28232478/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genome%20Res.&title=ABySS%202.0:%20resource-efficient%20assembly%20of%20large%20genomes%20using%20a%20Bloom%20filter.&author=S.%20D.%20Jackman&author=B.%20P.%20Vandervalk&author=H.%20Mohamadi&author=J.%20Chu&author=S.%20Yeo&volume=27&publication_year=2017&pages=768-777&pmid=28232478&doi=10.1101/gr.214346.116&)\]
36.  Johnson, M., I. Zaretskaya, Y. Raytselis, Y. Merezhuk, S. McGinnis _et al._, 2008 NCBI BLAST: a better web interface. _Nucleic Acids Res_ 36 (Web Server issue):W5–9. 10.1093/nar/gkn201 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkn201)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2447716/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18440982/)\]
37.  Jones P., Binns D., Chang H. Y., Fraser M., Li W. et al. , 2014.  InterProScan 5: genome-scale protein function classification. Bioinformatics 30: 1236–1240. 10.1093/bioinformatics/btu031 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btu031)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3998142/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24451626/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bioinformatics&title=InterProScan%205:%20genome-scale%20protein%20function%20classification.&author=P.%20Jones&author=D.%20Binns&author=H.%20Y.%20Chang&author=M.%20Fraser&author=W.%20Li&volume=30&publication_year=2014&pages=1236-1240&pmid=24451626&doi=10.1093/bioinformatics/btu031&)\]
38.  Kajitani R., Yoshimura D., Okuno M., Minakuchi Y., Kagoshima H. et al. , 2019.  Platanus-allee is a de novo haplotype assembler enabling a comprehensive access to divergent heterozygous regions. Nat. Commun. 10: 1–15. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09575-2)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6461651/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30979905/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat.%20Commun.&title=Platanus-allee%20is%20a%20de%20novo%20haplotype%20assembler%20enabling%20a%20comprehensive%20access%20to%20divergent%20heterozygous%20regions.&author=R.%20Kajitani&author=D.%20Yoshimura&author=M.%20Okuno&author=Y.%20Minakuchi&author=H.%20Kagoshima&volume=10&publication_year=2019&pages=1-15&pmid=30979905&doi=10.1038/s41467-019-09575-2&)\]
39.  Käll L., Krogh A., and Sonnhammer E. L., 2004.  A combined transmembrane topology and signal peptide prediction method. J. Mol. Biol. 338: 1027–1036. 10.1016/j.jmb.2004.03.016 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2004.03.016)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15111065/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Mol.%20Biol.&title=A%20combined%20transmembrane%20topology%20and%20signal%20peptide%20prediction%20method.&author=L.%20K%C3%A4ll&author=A.%20Krogh&author=E.%20L.%20Sonnhammer&volume=338&publication_year=2004&pages=1027-1036&pmid=15111065&doi=10.1016/j.jmb.2004.03.016&)\]
40.  Käll L., Krogh A., and Sonnhammer E. L. L., 2007.  Advantages of combined transmembrane topology and signal peptide prediction - the Phobius web server. Nucleic Acids Res. 35: W429–W432. 10.1093/nar/gkm256 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkm256)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1933244/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17483518/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nucleic%20Acids%20Res.&title=Advantages%20of%20combined%20transmembrane%20topology%20and%20signal%20peptide%20prediction%20-%20the%20Phobius%20web%20server.&author=L.%20K%C3%A4ll&author=A.%20Krogh&author=E.%20L.%20L.%20Sonnhammer&volume=35&publication_year=2007&pages=W429-W432&pmid=17483518&doi=10.1093/nar/gkm256&)\]
41.  Kalra H., Simpson R. J., Ji H., Aikawa E., Altevogt P. et al. , 2012.  Vesiclepedia: a compendium for extracellular vesicles with continuous community annotation. PLoS Biol. 10: e1001450 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001450 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1001450)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3525526/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23271954/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20Biol.&title=Vesiclepedia:%20a%20compendium%20for%20extracellular%20vesicles%20with%20continuous%20community%20annotation.&author=H.%20Kalra&author=R.%20J.%20Simpson&author=H.%20Ji&author=E.%20Aikawa&author=P.%20Altevogt&volume=10&publication_year=2012&pages=e1001450&pmid=23271954&doi=10.1371/journal.pbio.1001450&)\]
42.  Kanehisa M., Sato Y., and Morishima K., 2016.  BlastKOALA and ghostKOALA: KEGG tools for functional characterization of genome and metagenome sequences. J. Mol. Biol. 428: 726–731. 10.1016/j.jmb.2015.11.006 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2015.11.006)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26585406/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Mol.%20Biol.&title=BlastKOALA%20and%20ghostKOALA:%20KEGG%20tools%20for%20functional%20characterization%20of%20genome%20and%20metagenome%20sequences.&author=M.%20Kanehisa&author=Y.%20Sato&author=K.%20Morishima&volume=428&publication_year=2016&pages=726-731&pmid=26585406&doi=10.1016/j.jmb.2015.11.006&)\]
43.  Keebaugh E. S., and Schlenke T. A., 2014.  Insights from natural host-parasite interactions: The Drosophila model. Dev. Comp. Immunol. 42: 111–123. 10.1016/j.dci.2013.06.001 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dci.2013.06.001)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3808516/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23764256/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Dev.%20Comp.%20Immunol.&title=Insights%20from%20natural%20host-parasite%20interactions:%20The%20Drosophila%20model.&author=E.%20S.%20Keebaugh&author=T.%20A.%20Schlenke&volume=42&publication_year=2014&pages=111-123&pmid=23764256&doi=10.1016/j.dci.2013.06.001&)\]
44.  Keller O., Kollmar M., Stanke M., and Waack S., 2011.  A novel hybrid gene prediction method employing protein multiple sequence alignments. Bioinformatics 27: 757–763. 10.1093/bioinformatics/btr010 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btr010)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21216780/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bioinformatics&title=A%20novel%20hybrid%20gene%20prediction%20method%20employing%20protein%20multiple%20sequence%20alignments.&author=O.%20Keller&author=M.%20Kollmar&author=M.%20Stanke&author=S.%20Waack&volume=27&publication_year=2011&pages=757-763&pmid=21216780&doi=10.1093/bioinformatics/btr010&)\]
45.  Kim D., Landmead B., and Salzberg S. L., 2015.  HISAT: a fast spliced aligner with low memory requirements. Nat. Methods 12: 357–360. 10.1038/nmeth.3317 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.3317)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4655817/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25751142/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat.%20Methods&title=HISAT:%20a%20fast%20spliced%20aligner%20with%20low%20memory%20requirements.&author=D.%20Kim&author=B.%20Landmead&author=S.%20L.%20Salzberg&volume=12&publication_year=2015&pages=357-360&pmid=25751142&doi=10.1038/nmeth.3317&)\]
46.  Kraaijeveld K., Anvar S. Y., Frank J., Schmitz A., Bast J. et al. , 2016.  Decay of sexual trait genes in an asexual parasitoid wasp. Genome Biol. Evol. 8: 3685–3695. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/gbe/evw273)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5381511/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28172869/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genome%20Biol.%20Evol.&title=Decay%20of%20sexual%20trait%20genes%20in%20an%20asexual%20parasitoid%20wasp.&author=K.%20Kraaijeveld&author=S.%20Y.%20Anvar&author=J.%20Frank&author=A.%20Schmitz&author=J.%20Bast&volume=8&publication_year=2016&pages=3685-3695&pmid=28172869&doi=10.1093/gbe/evw273&)\]
47.  Krogh A., Larsson B., von Heijne G., and Sonnhammer E. L., 2001.  Predicting transmembrane protein topology with a hidden Markov model: application to complete genomes. J. Mol. Biol. 305: 567–580. 10.1006/jmbi.2000.4315 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1006/jmbi.2000.4315)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11152613/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Mol.%20Biol.&title=Predicting%20transmembrane%20protein%20topology%20with%20a%20hidden%20Markov%20model:%20application%20to%20complete%20genomes.&author=A.%20Krogh&author=B.%20Larsson&author=G.%20von%20Heijne&author=E.%20L.%20Sonnhammer&volume=305&publication_year=2001&pages=567-580&pmid=11152613&doi=10.1006/jmbi.2000.4315&)\]
48.  Labrosse C., Staslak K., Lesobre J., Grangeia A., Huguet E. et al. , 2005.  A RhoGAP protein as a main immune suppressive factor in the Leptopilina boulardi (Hymenoptera, Figitidae) - Drosophila melanogaster interaction. Insect Biochem. Mol. Biol. 35: 93–103. 10.1016/j.ibmb.2004.10.004 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ibmb.2004.10.004)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15681220/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Insect%20Biochem.%20Mol.%20Biol.&title=A%20RhoGAP%20protein%20as%20a%20main%20immune%20suppressive%20factor%20in%20the%20Leptopilina%20boulardi%20\(Hymenoptera,%20Figitidae\)%20-%20Drosophila%20melanogaster%20interaction.&author=C.%20Labrosse&author=K.%20Staslak&author=J.%20Lesobre&author=A.%20Grangeia&author=E.%20Huguet&volume=35&publication_year=2005&pages=93-103&pmid=15681220&doi=10.1016/j.ibmb.2004.10.004&)\]
49.  Lane N., 2009.  Biodiversity: On the origin of bar codes. Nature 462: 272–274. 10.1038/462272a \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/462272a)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19924185/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nature&title=Biodiversity:%20On%20the%20origin%20of%20bar%20codes.&author=N.%20Lane&volume=462&publication_year=2009&pages=272-274&pmid=19924185&doi=10.1038/462272a&)\]
50.  Li H., and Durbin R., 2009.  Fast and accurate short read alignment with Burrows-Wheeler transform. Bioinformatics 25: 1754–1760. 10.1093/bioinformatics/btp324 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btp324)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2705234/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19451168/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bioinformatics&title=Fast%20and%20accurate%20short%20read%20alignment%20with%20Burrows-Wheeler%20transform.&author=H.%20Li&author=R.%20Durbin&volume=25&publication_year=2009&pages=1754-1760&pmid=19451168&doi=10.1093/bioinformatics/btp324&)\]
51.  Li M., Au L. Y. C., Douglah D., Chong A., White B. J. et al. , 2017a Generation of heritable germline mutations in the jewel wasp Nasonia vitripennis using CRISPR/Cas9. Sci. Rep. 7: 901 10.1038/s41598-017-00990-3 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-00990-3)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5430486/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28424460/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Sci.%20Rep.&title=Generation%20of%20heritable%20germline%20mutations%20in%20the%20jewel%20wasp%20Nasonia%20vitripennis%20using%20CRISPR/Cas9.&author=M.%20Li&author=L.%20Y.%20C.%20Au&author=D.%20Douglah&author=A.%20Chong&author=B.%20J.%20White&volume=7&publication_year=2017&pages=901&pmid=28424460&doi=10.1038/s41598-017-00990-3&)\]
52.  Li M., Bui M., and Akbari O. S., 2017b Embryo microinjection and transplantation technique for Nasonia vitripennis genome manipulation. J. Vis. Exp 1–9. 10.3791/56990 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3791/56990)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5908372/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29364231/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Vis.%20Exp&title=Embryo%20microinjection%20and%20transplantation%20technique%20for%20Nasonia%20vitripennis%20genome%20manipulation.&author=M.%20Li&author=M.%20Bui&author=O.%20S.%20Akbari&publication_year=2017&pages=1-9&pmid=29364231&doi=10.3791/56990&)\]
53.  Li W., Cowley A., Uludag M., Gur T., McWilliam H. et al. , 2015.  The EMBL-EBI bioinformatics web and programmatic tools framework. Nucleic Acids Res. 43: W580–W584. 10.1093/nar/gkv279 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkv279)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4489272/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25845596/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nucleic%20Acids%20Res.&title=The%20EMBL-EBI%20bioinformatics%20web%20and%20programmatic%20tools%20framework.&author=W.%20Li&author=A.%20Cowley&author=M.%20Uludag&author=T.%20Gur&author=H.%20McWilliam&volume=43&publication_year=2015&pages=W580-W584&pmid=25845596&doi=10.1093/nar/gkv279&)\]
54.  Mapleson D., Garcia Accinelli G., Kettleborough G., Wright J., and Clavijo B. J., 2016.  KAT: a K-mer analysis toolkit to quality control NGS datasets and genome assemblies. Bioinformatics 33: 574–576. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btw663)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5408915/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27797770/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bioinformatics&title=KAT:%20a%20K-mer%20analysis%20toolkit%20to%20quality%20control%20NGS%20datasets%20and%20genome%20assemblies.&author=D.%20Mapleson&author=G.%20Garcia%20Accinelli&author=G.%20Kettleborough&author=J.%20Wright&author=B.%20J.%20Clavijo&volume=33&publication_year=2016&pages=574-576&pmid=27797770&doi=10.1093/bioinformatics/btw663&)\]
55.  Marchler-Bauer A., Bo Y., Han L., He J., Lanczycki C. J. et al. , 2017.  CDD/SPARCLE: functional classification of proteins via subfamily domain architectures. Nucleic Acids Res. 45: D200–D203. 10.1093/nar/gkw1129 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkw1129)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5210587/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27899674/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nucleic%20Acids%20Res.&title=CDD/SPARCLE:%20functional%20classification%20of%20proteins%20via%20subfamily%20domain%20architectures.&author=A.%20Marchler-Bauer&author=Y.%20Bo&author=L.%20Han&author=J.%20He&author=C.%20J.%20Lanczycki&volume=45&publication_year=2017&pages=D200-D203&pmid=27899674&doi=10.1093/nar/gkw1129&)\]
56.  Martinson E. O., Mrinalini Y. D. Kelkar C. H. Chang, and Werren J. H., 2017.  The evolution of venom by co-option of single-copy genes. Curr Biol. 27: 2007–2013.e8. 10.1016/j.cub.2017.05.032 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2017.05.032)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5719492/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28648823/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr%20Biol.&title=The%20evolution%20of%20venom%20by%20co-option%20of%20single-copy%20genes.&author=E.%20O.%20Martinson&author=Y.%20D.%20Mrinalini&author=C.%20H.%20Kelkar&author=%20Chang&author=J.%20H.%20Werren&volume=27&publication_year=2017&pages=2007-2013.e8&pmid=28648823&doi=10.1016/j.cub.2017.05.032&)\]
57.  Melk J. P., and Govind S., 1999.  Developmental analysis of Ganaspis xanthopoda, a larval parasitoid of Drosophila melanogaster. J. Exp. Biol. 202: 1885–1896. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1242/jeb.202.14.1885)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10377270/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Exp.%20Biol.&title=Developmental%20analysis%20of%20Ganaspis%20xanthopoda,%20a%20larval%20parasitoid%20of%20Drosophila%20melanogaster.&author=J.%20P.%20Melk&author=S.%20Govind&volume=202&publication_year=1999&pages=1885-1896&pmid=10377270&doi=10.1242/jeb.202.14.1885&)\]
58.  Mikheenko A., Valin G., Prjibelski A., Saveliev V., and Gurevich A., 2016.  Icarus: visualizer for de novo assembly evaluation. Bioinformatics 32: 3321–3323. 10.1093/bioinformatics/btw379 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btw379)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27378299/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bioinformatics&title=Icarus:%20visualizer%20for%20de%20novo%20assembly%20evaluation.&author=A.%20Mikheenko&author=G.%20Valin&author=A.%20Prjibelski&author=V.%20Saveliev&author=A.%20Gurevich&volume=32&publication_year=2016&pages=3321-3323&pmid=27378299&doi=10.1093/bioinformatics/btw379&)\]
59.  Misof B., Liu S., Meusemann K., Peters R. S., Donath A. et al. , 2014.  Phylogenomics resolves the timing and pattern of insect evolution. Science 346: 763–767. 10.1126/science.1257570 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1257570)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25378627/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Science&title=Phylogenomics%20resolves%20the%20timing%20and%20pattern%20of%20insect%20evolution.&author=B.%20Misof&author=S.%20Liu&author=K.%20Meusemann&author=R.%20S.%20Peters&author=A.%20Donath&volume=346&publication_year=2014&pages=763-767&pmid=25378627&doi=10.1126/science.1257570&)\]
60.  Morales J., Chiu H., Oo T., Plaza R., Hoskins S. et al. , 2005.  Biogenesis, structure, and immune-suppressive effects of virus-like particles of a Drosophila parasitoid, Leptopilina victoriae. J. Insect Physiol. 51: 181–195. 10.1016/j.jinsphys.2004.11.002 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinsphys.2004.11.002)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15749103/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Insect%20Physiol.&title=Biogenesis,%20structure,%20and%20immune-suppressive%20effects%20of%20virus-like%20particles%20of%20a%20Drosophila%20parasitoid,%20Leptopilina%20victoriae.&author=J.%20Morales&author=H.%20Chiu&author=T.%20Oo&author=R.%20Plaza&author=S.%20Hoskins&volume=51&publication_year=2005&pages=181-195&pmid=15749103&doi=10.1016/j.jinsphys.2004.11.002&)\]
61.  Mortimer N. T., Goecks J., Kacsoh B. Z., Mobley J. A., Bowersock G. J. et al. , 2013.  Parasitoid wasp venom SERCA regulates Drosophila calcium levels and inhibits cellular immunity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110: 9427–9432. 10.1073/pnas.1222351110 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1222351110)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3677475/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23690612/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc.%20Natl.%20Acad.%20Sci.%20USA&title=Parasitoid%20wasp%20venom%20SERCA%20regulates%20Drosophila%20calcium%20levels%20and%20inhibits%20cellular%20immunity.&author=N.%20T.%20Mortimer&author=J.%20Goecks&author=B.%20Z.%20Kacsoh&author=J.%20A.%20Mobley&author=G.%20J.%20Bowersock&volume=110&publication_year=2013&pages=9427-9432&pmid=23690612&doi=10.1073/pnas.1222351110&)\]
62.  Narendran T. C., 2001.  Parasitic hymenoptera and biological Control, pp. 1–12 in biocontrol potential and its exploitation in sustainable agriculture: Volume 2: Insect Pests, ed. by Upadhyay R. K., Mukerji K. G. and Chamola B. P.. Springer, Boston, MA. \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Narendran%20T.%20C.,%202001.%20%E2%80%83Parasitic%20hymenoptera%20and%20biological%20Control,%20pp.%201%E2%80%9312%20in%20biocontrol%20potential%20and%20its%20exploitation%20in%20sustainable%20agriculture:%20Volume%202:%20Insect%20Pests,%20ed.%20by%20Upadhyay%20R.%20K.,%20Mukerji%20K.%20G.%20and%20Chamola%20B.%20P..%20Springer,%20Boston,%20MA.)\]
63.  Nielsen H., 2017.  Predicting secretory proteins with signalP. Methods Mol. Biol. 1611: 59–73. 10.1007/978-1-4939-7015-5\_6 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-7015-5_6)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28451972/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Methods%20Mol.%20Biol.&title=Predicting%20secretory%20proteins%20with%20signalP.&author=H.%20Nielsen&volume=1611&publication_year=2017&pages=59-73&pmid=28451972&doi=10.1007/978-1-4939-7015-5_6&)\]
64.  Nolte-’t Hoen E., Cremer T., Gallo R. C., and Margolis L. B., 2016.  Extracellular vesicles and viruses: Are they close relatives? Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 113: 9155–9161. 10.1073/pnas.1605146113 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1605146113)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4995926/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27432966/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc.%20Natl.%20Acad.%20Sci.%20USA&title=Extracellular%20vesicles%20and%20viruses:%20Are%20they%20close%20relatives?&author=E.%20Nolte-%E2%80%99t%20Hoen&author=T.%20Cremer&author=R.%20C.%20Gallo&author=L.%20B.%20Margolis&volume=113&publication_year=2016&pages=9155-9161&pmid=27432966&doi=10.1073/pnas.1605146113&)\]
65.  Pannebakker B. A., Pijnacker L. P., Zwaan B. J., and Beukeboom L. W., 2004.  Cytology of Wolbachia-induced parthenogenesis in Leptopilina clavipes (Hymenoptera: Figitidae). Genome 47: 299–303. 10.1139/g03-137 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1139/g03-137)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15060582/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genome&title=Cytology%20of%20Wolbachia-induced%20parthenogenesis%20in%20Leptopilina%20clavipes%20\(Hymenoptera:%20Figitidae\).&author=B.%20A.%20Pannebakker&author=L.%20P.%20Pijnacker&author=B.%20J.%20Zwaan&author=L.%20W.%20Beukeboom&volume=47&publication_year=2004&pages=299-303&pmid=15060582&doi=10.1139/g03-137&)\]
66.  Pathan M., Fonseka P., Chitti S. V., Kang T., Sanwlani R. et al. , 2019.  Vesiclepedia 2019: a compendium of RNA, proteins, lipids and metabolites in extracellular vesicles. Nucleic Acids Res. 47: D516–D519. 10.1093/nar/gky1029 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gky1029)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6323905/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30395310/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nucleic%20Acids%20Res.&title=Vesiclepedia%202019:%20a%20compendium%20of%20RNA,%20proteins,%20lipids%20and%20metabolites%20in%20extracellular%20vesicles.&author=M.%20Pathan&author=P.%20Fonseka&author=S.%20V.%20Chitti&author=T.%20Kang&author=R.%20Sanwlani&volume=47&publication_year=2019&pages=D516-D519&pmid=30395310&doi=10.1093/nar/gky1029&)\]
67.  Pathan M., Keerthikumar S., Ang C. S., Gangoda L., Quek C. Y. et al. , 2015.  FunRich: An open access standalone functional enrichment and interaction network analysis tool. Proteomics 15: 2597–2601. 10.1002/pmic.201400515 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/pmic.201400515)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25921073/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proteomics&title=FunRich:%20An%20open%20access%20standalone%20functional%20enrichment%20and%20interaction%20network%20analysis%20tool.&author=M.%20Pathan&author=S.%20Keerthikumar&author=C.%20S.%20Ang&author=L.%20Gangoda&author=C.%20Y.%20Quek&volume=15&publication_year=2015&pages=2597-2601&pmid=25921073&doi=10.1002/pmic.201400515&)\]
68.  Pathan M., Keerthikumar S., Chisanga D., Alessandro R., Ang C. S. et al. , 2017.  A novel community driven software for functional enrichment analysis of extracellular vesicles data. J. Extracell. Vesicles 6: 1321455 10.1080/20013078.2017.1321455 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1080/20013078.2017.1321455)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5505018/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28717418/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Extracell.%20Vesicles&title=A%20novel%20community%20driven%20software%20for%20functional%20enrichment%20analysis%20of%20extracellular%20vesicles%20data.&author=M.%20Pathan&author=S.%20Keerthikumar&author=D.%20Chisanga&author=R.%20Alessandro&author=C.%20S.%20Ang&volume=6&publication_year=2017&pages=1321455&pmid=28717418&doi=10.1080/20013078.2017.1321455&)\]
69.  Patot S., Allemand R., Fleury F., and Varaldi J., 2012.  An inherited virus influences the coexistence of parasitoid species through behaviour manipulation. Ecol. Lett. 15: 603–610. 10.1111/j.1461-0248.2012.01774.x \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1461-0248.2012.01774.x)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22487404/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Ecol.%20Lett.&title=An%20inherited%20virus%20influences%20the%20coexistence%20of%20parasitoid%20species%20through%20behaviour%20manipulation.&author=S.%20Patot&author=R.%20Allemand&author=F.%20Fleury&author=J.%20Varaldi&volume=15&publication_year=2012&pages=603-610&pmid=22487404&doi=10.1111/j.1461-0248.2012.01774.x&)\]
70.  Pichon A., Bézier A., Urbach S., Aury J. M., Jouan V. et al. , 2015.  Recurrent DNA virus domestication leading to different parasite virulence strategies. Sci. Adv. 1: e1501150 10.1126/sciadv.1501150 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1501150)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4681339/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26702449/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Sci.%20Adv.&title=Recurrent%20DNA%20virus%20domestication%20leading%20to%20different%20parasite%20virulence%20strategies.&author=A.%20Pichon&author=A.%20B%C3%A9zier&author=S.%20Urbach&author=J.%20M.%20Aury&author=V.%20Jouan&volume=1&publication_year=2015&pages=e1501150&pmid=26702449&doi=10.1126/sciadv.1501150&)\]
71.  Pritchard L., White J. A., Birch P. R. J., and Toth I. K., 2006.  GenomeDiagram: a python package for the visualization of large-scale genomic data. Bioinformatics 22: 616–617. 10.1093/bioinformatics/btk021 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btk021)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16377612/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bioinformatics&title=GenomeDiagram:%20a%20python%20package%20for%20the%20visualization%20of%20large-scale%20genomic%20data.&author=L.%20Pritchard&author=J.%20A.%20White&author=P.%20R.%20J.%20Birch&author=I.%20K.%20Toth&volume=22&publication_year=2006&pages=616-617&pmid=16377612&doi=10.1093/bioinformatics/btk021&)\]
72.  Ramroop J., 2016.  Mechanisms of immune activation and suppression by parasitic wasps of Drosophila in biology, Graduate Center, City University of New York; [https://academicworks.cuny.edu/gc\_etds/1329](https://academicworks.cuny.edu/gc_etds/1329) \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Ramroop%20J.,%202016.%20%E2%80%83Mechanisms%20of%20immune%20activation%20and%20suppression%20by%20parasitic%20wasps%20of%20Drosophila%20in%20biology,%20Graduate%20Center,%20City%20University%20of%20New%20York;%20https://academicworks.cuny.edu/gc_etds/1329)\]
73.  Rizki T. M., Rizki R. M., and Carton Y., 1990.  Leptopilina heterotoma and L. boulardi: strategies to avoid cellular defense responses of Drosophila melanogaster. Exp. Parasitol. 70: 466–475. 10.1016/0014-4894(90)90131-U \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/0014-4894\(90\)90131-U)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2108875/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Exp.%20Parasitol.&title=Leptopilina%20heterotoma%20and%20L.%20boulardi:%20strategies%20to%20avoid%20cellular%20defense%20responses%20of%20Drosophila%20melanogaster.&author=T.%20M.%20Rizki&author=R.%20M.%20Rizki&author=Y.%20Carton&volume=70&publication_year=1990&pages=466-475&pmid=2108875&doi=10.1016/0014-4894\(90\)90131-U&)\]
74.  Rodriguez J. J., Fernandez-Triana J. L., Smith M. A., Janzen D. H., Hallwachs W. et al. , 2013.  Extrapolations from field studies and known faunas converge on dramatically increased estimates of global microgastrine parasitoid wasp species richness (Hymenoptera: Braconidae). Insect Conserv. Divers. 6: 530–536. 10.1111/icad.12003 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/icad.12003)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Insect%20Conserv.%20Divers.&title=Extrapolations%20from%20field%20studies%20and%20known%20faunas%20converge%20on%20dramatically%20increased%20estimates%20of%20global%20microgastrine%20parasitoid%20wasp%20species%20richness%20\(Hymenoptera:%20Braconidae\).&author=J.%20J.%20Rodriguez&author=J.%20L.%20Fernandez-Triana&author=M.%20A.%20Smith&author=D.%20H.%20Janzen&author=W.%20Hallwachs&volume=6&publication_year=2013&pages=530-536&doi=10.1111/icad.12003&)\]
75.  Schlenke T. A., Morales J., Govind S., and Clark A. G., 2007.  Contrasting infection strategies in generalist and specialist wasp parasitoids of Drosophila melanogaster. PLoS Pathog. 3: 1486–1501. 10.1371/journal.ppat.0030158 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.0030158)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2042021/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17967061/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20Pathog.&title=Contrasting%20infection%20strategies%20in%20generalist%20and%20specialist%20wasp%20parasitoids%20of%20Drosophila%20melanogaster.&author=T.%20A.%20Schlenke&author=J.%20Morales&author=S.%20Govind&author=A.%20G.%20Clark&volume=3&publication_year=2007&pages=1486-1501&pmid=17967061&doi=10.1371/journal.ppat.0030158&)\]
76.  Siebert A. L., Wheeler D., and Werren J. H., 2015.  A new approach for investigating venom function applied to venom calreticulin in a parasitoid wasp. Toxicon 107: 304–316. 10.1016/j.toxicon.2015.08.012 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.toxicon.2015.08.012)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4674333/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26359852/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Toxicon&title=A%20new%20approach%20for%20investigating%20venom%20function%20applied%20to%20venom%20calreticulin%20in%20a%20parasitoid%20wasp.&author=A.%20L.%20Siebert&author=D.%20Wheeler&author=J.%20H.%20Werren&volume=107&publication_year=2015&pages=304-316&pmid=26359852&doi=10.1016/j.toxicon.2015.08.012&)\]
77.  Simão F. A., Waterhouse R. M., Ioannidis P., Kriventseva E. V., and Zdobnov E. M., 2015.  BUSCO: assessing genome assembly and annotation completeness with single-copy orthologs. Bioinformatics 31: 3210–3212. 10.1093/bioinformatics/btv351 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btv351)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26059717/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bioinformatics&title=BUSCO:%20assessing%20genome%20assembly%20and%20annotation%20completeness%20with%20single-copy%20orthologs.&author=F.%20A.%20Sim%C3%A3o&author=R.%20M.%20Waterhouse&author=P.%20Ioannidis&author=E.%20V.%20Kriventseva&author=E.%20M.%20Zdobnov&volume=31&publication_year=2015&pages=3210-3212&pmid=26059717&doi=10.1093/bioinformatics/btv351&)\]
78.  Small C., Paddibhatla I., Rajwani R., and Govind S., 2012.  An introduction to parasitic wasps of Drosophila and the antiparasite immune response. J. Vis. Exp. e3347: 1–8. 10.3791/3347 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3791/3347)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3466936/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22588641/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Vis.%20Exp.&title=An%20introduction%20to%20parasitic%20wasps%20of%20Drosophila%20and%20the%20antiparasite%20immune%20response.&author=C.%20Small&author=I.%20Paddibhatla&author=R.%20Rajwani&author=S.%20Govind&publication_year=2012&pages=e3347-8&pmid=22588641&doi=10.3791/3347&)\]
79.  Smith-Unna R., Boursnell C., Patro R., Hibberd J. M., and Kelly S., 2016.  TransRate: reference-free quality assessment of de novo transcriptome assemblies. Genome Res. 26: 1134–1144. 10.1101/gr.196469.115 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.196469.115)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4971766/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27252236/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genome%20Res.&title=TransRate:%20reference-free%20quality%20assessment%20of%20de%20novo%20transcriptome%20assemblies.&author=R.%20Smith-Unna&author=C.%20Boursnell&author=R.%20Patro&author=J.%20M.%20Hibberd&author=S.%20Kelly&volume=26&publication_year=2016&pages=1134-1144&pmid=27252236&doi=10.1101/gr.196469.115&)\]
80.  Sonnhammer E. L., von Heijne G., and Krogh A., 1998.  A hidden Markov model for predicting transmembrane helices in protein sequences. Proc. Int. Conf. Intell. Syst. Mol. Biol. 6: 175–182. \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9783223/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc.%20Int.%20Conf.%20Intell.%20Syst.%20Mol.%20Biol.&title=A%20hidden%20Markov%20model%20for%20predicting%20transmembrane%20helices%20in%20protein%20sequences.&author=E.%20L.%20Sonnhammer&author=G.%20von%20Heijne&author=A.%20Krogh&volume=6&publication_year=1998&pages=175-182&pmid=9783223&)\]
81.  Stanke, M., and B. Morgenstern, 2005 AUGUSTUS: a web server for gene prediction in eukaryotes that allows user-defined constraints. Nucleic Acids Res 33 (Web Server issue):W465–467. 10.1093/nar/gki458 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gki458)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1160219/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15980513/)\]
82.  Stanke, M., R. Steinkamp, S. Waack, and B. Morgenstern, 2004 AUGUSTUS: a web server for gene finding in eukaryotes. Nucleic Acids Res 32 (Web Server issue):W309–312. 10.1093/nar/gkh379 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkh379)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC441517/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15215400/)\]
83.  Strand M. R., and Burke G. R., 2015.  Polydnaviruses: From discovery to current insights. Virology 479–480: 393–402. 10.1016/j.virol.2015.01.018 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.virol.2015.01.018)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4424053/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25670535/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Virology&title=Polydnaviruses:%20From%20discovery%20to%20current%20insights.&author=M.%20R.%20Strand&author=G.%20R.%20Burke&volume=479%E2%80%93480&publication_year=2015&pages=393-402&pmid=25670535&doi=10.1016/j.virol.2015.01.018&)\]
84.  The Gene Ontology Consortium , 2019.  The Gene Ontology Resource: 20 years and still GOing strong. Nucleic Acids Res. 47: D330–D338. 10.1093/nar/gky1055 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gky1055)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6323945/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30395331/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nucleic%20Acids%20Res.&title=The%20Gene%20Ontology%20Resource:%2020%20years%20and%20still%20GOing%20strong.&volume=47&publication_year=2019&pages=D330-D338&pmid=30395331&doi=10.1093/nar/gky1055&)\]
85.  Trapnell C., Roberts A., Goff L., Pertea G., Kim D. et al. , 2012.  Differential gene and transcript expression analysis of RNA-seq experiments with TopHat and Cufflinks. Nat. Protoc. 7: 562–578. 10.1038/nprot.2012.016 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2012.016)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3334321/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22383036/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat.%20Protoc.&title=Differential%20gene%20and%20transcript%20expression%20analysis%20of%20RNA-seq%20experiments%20with%20TopHat%20and%20Cufflinks.&author=C.%20Trapnell&author=A.%20Roberts&author=L.%20Goff&author=G.%20Pertea&author=D.%20Kim&volume=7&publication_year=2012&pages=562-578&pmid=22383036&doi=10.1038/nprot.2012.016&)\]
86.  Uniport Consortium , 2015.  UniProt: a hub for protein information. Nucleic Acids Res. 43: D204–D212. 10.1093/nar/gku989 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gku989)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4384041/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25348405/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nucleic%20Acids%20Res.&title=UniProt:%20a%20hub%20for%20protein%20information.&volume=43&publication_year=2015&pages=D204-D212&pmid=25348405&doi=10.1093/nar/gku989&)\]
87.  Varaldi J., Petit S., Boulétreau M., and Fleury F., 2006.  The virus infecting the parasitoid Leptopilina boulardi exerts a specific action on superparasitism behaviour. Parasitology 132: 747–756. 10.1017/S0031182006009930 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0031182006009930)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16700960/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Parasitology&title=The%20virus%20infecting%20the%20parasitoid%20Leptopilina%20boulardi%20exerts%20a%20specific%20action%20on%20superparasitism%20behaviour.&author=J.%20Varaldi&author=S.%20Petit&author=M.%20Boul%C3%A9treau&author=F.%20Fleury&volume=132&publication_year=2006&pages=747-756&pmid=16700960&doi=10.1017/S0031182006009930&)\]
88.  Volkoff A. N., Jouan V., Urbach S., Samain S., Bergoin M. et al. , 2010.  Analysis of virion structural components reveals vestiges of the ancestral ichnovirus genome. PLoS Pathog. 6: e1000923 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000923 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1000923)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2877734/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20523890/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20Pathog.&title=Analysis%20of%20virion%20structural%20components%20reveals%20vestiges%20of%20the%20ancestral%20ichnovirus%20genome.&author=A.%20N.%20Volkoff&author=V.%20Jouan&author=S.%20Urbach&author=S.%20Samain&author=M.%20Bergoin&volume=6&publication_year=2010&pages=e1000923&pmid=20523890&doi=10.1371/journal.ppat.1000923&)\]
89.  Wan B., Goguet E., Ravallec M., Pierre O., Lemauf S. et al. , 2019.  Venom atypical extracellular vesicles as interspecies vehicles of virulence factors involved in host specificity: The case of a Drosophila parasitoid wasp. Front. Immunol. 10: 1688 10.3389/fimmu.2019.01688 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2019.01688)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6653201/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31379874/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Front.%20Immunol.&title=Venom%20atypical%20extracellular%20vesicles%20as%20interspecies%20vehicles%20of%20virulence%20factors%20involved%20in%20host%20specificity:%20The%20case%20of%20a%20Drosophila%20parasitoid%20wasp.&author=B.%20Wan&author=E.%20Goguet&author=M.%20Ravallec&author=O.%20Pierre&author=S.%20Lemauf&volume=10&publication_year=2019&pages=1688&pmid=31379874&doi=10.3389/fimmu.2019.01688&)\]
90.  Wang Z., Chen Y., and Li Y., 2004.  A brief review of computational gene prediction methods. Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 2: 216–221. 10.1016/S1672-0229(04)02028-5 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1672-0229\(04\)02028-5)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5187414/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15901250/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genomics%20Proteomics%20Bioinformatics&title=A%20brief%20review%20of%20computational%20gene%20prediction%20methods.&author=Z.%20Wang&author=Y.%20Chen&author=Y.%20Li&volume=2&publication_year=2004&pages=216-221&pmid=15901250&doi=10.1016/S1672-0229\(04\)02028-5&)\]
91.  Waterhouse R. M., Seppey M., Simão F. A., Manni M., Ioannidis P. et al. , 2017.  BUSCO applications from quality assessments to gene prediction and phylogenomics. Mol. Biol. Evol. 35: 543–548. 10.1093/molbev/msx319 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msx319)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5850278/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29220515/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol.%20Biol.%20Evol.&title=BUSCO%20applications%20from%20quality%20assessments%20to%20gene%20prediction%20and%20phylogenomics.&author=R.%20M.%20Waterhouse&author=M.%20Seppey&author=F.%20A.%20Sim%C3%A3o&author=M.%20Manni&author=P.%20Ioannidis&volume=35&publication_year=2017&pages=543-548&pmid=29220515&doi=10.1093/molbev/msx319&)\]
92.  Werren J. H., Baldo L., and Clark M. E., 2008.  Wolbachia: master manipulators of invertebrate biology. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 6: 741–751. 10.1038/nrmicro1969 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrmicro1969)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18794912/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat.%20Rev.%20Microbiol.&title=Wolbachia:%20master%20manipulators%20of%20invertebrate%20biology.&author=J.%20H.%20Werren&author=L.%20Baldo&author=M.%20E.%20Clark&volume=6&publication_year=2008&pages=741-751&pmid=18794912&doi=10.1038/nrmicro1969&)\]
93.  Werren, J. H., D. W. Loehlin, and J. D. Giebel, 2009 Larval RNAi in nasonia (parasitoid wasp). _Cold Spring Harb Protoc_ 2009 (10):pdb.prot5311. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1101/pdb.prot5311)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2916726/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20147056/)\]
94.  Young K. A., Herbert A. P., Barlow P. N., Holers V. M., and Hannan J. P., 2008.  Molecular basis of the interaction between complement receptor type 2 (CR2/CD21) and Epstein-Barr virus glycoprotein gp350. J. Virol. 82: 11217–11227. 10.1128/JVI.01673-08 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.01673-08)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2573242/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18786993/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Virol.&title=Molecular%20basis%20of%20the%20interaction%20between%20complement%20receptor%20type%202%20\(CR2/CD21\)%20and%20Epstein-Barr%20virus%20glycoprotein%20gp350.&author=K.%20A.%20Young&author=A.%20P.%20Herbert&author=P.%20N.%20Barlow&author=V.%20M.%20Holers&author=J.%20P.%20Hannan&volume=82&publication_year=2008&pages=11217-11227&pmid=18786993&doi=10.1128/JVI.01673-08&)\]
95.  Zhang S. V., Zhuo L. T., and Hahn M. W., 2016.  AGOUTI: improving genome assembly and annotation using transcriptome data. Gigascience 5: 31 10.1186/s13742-016-0136-3 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13742-016-0136-3)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4952227/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27435057/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Gigascience&title=AGOUTI:%20improving%20genome%20assembly%20and%20annotation%20using%20transcriptome%20data.&author=S.%20V.%20Zhang&author=L.%20T.%20Zhuo&author=M.%20W.%20Hahn&volume=5&publication_year=2016&pages=31&pmid=27435057&doi=10.1186/s13742-016-0136-3&)\]
96.  Zimin A. V., Marcais G., Puiu D., Roberts M., Salzberg S. L. et al. , 2013.  The MaSuRCA genome assembler. Bioinformatics 29: 2669–2677. 10.1093/bioinformatics/btt476 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btt476)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3799473/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23990416/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Bioinformatics&title=The%20MaSuRCA%20genome%20assembler.&author=A.%20V.%20Zimin&author=G.%20Marcais&author=D.%20Puiu&author=M.%20Roberts&author=S.%20L.%20Salzberg&volume=29&publication_year=2013&pages=2669-2677&pmid=23990416&doi=10.1093/bioinformatics/btt476&)\]

## Associated Data

_This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article._

### Data Availability Statement

_L. heterotoma_ strains ([Chiu _et al._ 2006](#bib10); [Schlenke _et al._ 2007](#bib78)) are available upon request. File S1 contains details of supplemental files and tables. File S2 contains listing of accession numbers for all sequences reported in this work. Figure S1 contains the 27-mer _vs._ GC count comparison of MSEV containing scaffolds to non-MSEV containing scaffolds. Table S1 contains annotations and related data for proteins. Table S2 contains BLAST search results of the MSEV proteome against the nr database. Table S3 contains all BUSCOs found in male, female, and joint genome assemblies. MSEV protein sequences are available upon request. Accession numbers for datasets are as follows: _Leptopilina heterotoma_ strain _Lh_ 14, genome assembly: Male genome: QYUB0000000, Female genome: QYUC0000000, Joint genome: [VOOK00000000](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/VOOK00000000). _Leptopilina heterotoma_ strain _Lh_ 14, whole-body transcriptome: [GHUQ00000000](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/GHUQ00000000). _Leptopilina heterotoma_ abdominal transcriptome by Goecks _et al._: GAJC0000000. _Leptopilina clavipes_ genome Bioproject: PRJNA84205. _Leptopilina heterotoma_ strain _Lh_ 14 proteome: PRIDE: PXD005632. Supplemental material available at figshare: [https://doi.org/10.25387/g3.10005260](https://doi.org/10.25387/g3.10005260).