---
title: "The Drosophila SUN protein Spag4 cooperates with the coiled-coil protein Yuri Gagarin to maintain association of the basal body and spermatid nucleus"
authors: ["Martin P Kracklauer", "Heather M Wiora", "William J Deery", "Xin Chen", "Benjamin Bolival, Jr", "Dwight Romanowicz", "Rebecca A Simonette", "Margaret T Fuller", "Janice A Fischer", "Kathleen M Beckingham"]
journal: "Journal of Cell Science"
date: "2010 Jul 20"
doi: "10.1242/jcs.066589"
source_url: "https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2915878/"
---

# The Drosophila SUN protein Spag4 cooperates with the coiled-coil protein Yuri Gagarin to maintain association of the basal body and spermatid nucleus

*Journal of Cell Science*, 2010 Jul 20, [doi:10.1242/jcs.066589](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.066589)

### Martin P Kracklauer
### Heather M Wiora
### William J Deery
### Xin Chen
### Benjamin Bolival, Jr
### Dwight Romanowicz
### Rebecca A Simonette
### Margaret T Fuller
### Janice A Fischer
### Kathleen M Beckingham

## Abstract

Maintaining the proximity of centrosomes to nuclei is important in several cellular contexts, and LINC complexes formed by SUN and KASH proteins are crucial in this process. Here, we characterize the presumed _Drosophila_ ortholog of the mammalian SUN protein, sperm-associated antigen 4 (Spag4, previously named Giacomo), and demonstrate that Spag4 is required for centriole and nuclear attachment during spermatogenesis. Production of _spag4_ mRNA is limited to the testis, and Spag4 protein shows a dynamic pattern of association with the germline nuclei, including a concentration of protein at the site of attachment of the single spermatid centriole. In the absence of Spag4, nuclei and centrioles or basal bodies (BBs) dissociate from each other after meiosis. This role of Spag4 in centriolar attachment does not involve either of the two KASH proteins of the _Drosophila_ genome (Klarsicht and MSP-300), but does require the coiled-coil protein Yuri Gagarin. Yuri shows an identical pattern of localization at the nuclear surface to Spag4 during spermatogenesis, and epistasis studies show that the activities of Yuri and dynein-dynactin are downstream of _spag4_ in this centriole attachment pathway. The later defects in spermatogenesis seen for _yuri_ and _spag4_ mutants are similar, suggesting they could be secondary to initial disruption of events at the nuclear surface.

**Keywords:** KASH protein, SUN protein, Centrosome, Centriole, Coiled-coil proteins, Sperm basal body, Spermatogenesis

## Introduction

Within eukaryotic cells, a centrosome or spindle-pole body (SPB) functions as a microtubule-organizing center (MTOC) and is typically found closely apposed to the nuclear membrane. Disruption of the MTOC-nucleus association frequently leads to cellular abnormalities, including defective nuclear positioning ([Malone et al., 1999](#R30); [Starr et al., 2001](#R44)), abnormal morphology of cells and organelles ([Fischer-Vize and Mosley, 1994](#R11); [Mosley-Bishop et al., 1999](#R34); [Patterson et al., 2004](#R38)), altered cell migration ([Gomes et al., 2005](#R13); [Lüke et al., 2008](#R29)) and defective chromosome segregation during mitosis ([Malone et al., 2003](#R31); [Xiong et al., 2008](#R56)). These findings indicate that the nuclear-MTOC association is essential in many cellular processes.

Nuclear-MTOC association is often maintained by a LINC complex comprising SUN (Sad1/UNC) and KASH (Klar-ANC-Syne homology) proteins ([Gruenbaum et al., 2005](#R15); [Starr and Fischer, 2005](#R43); [Crisp et al., 2006](#R7); [Stewart-Hutchinson et al., 2008](#R45)). SUN and KASH proteins are integral membrane proteins of the inner and outer nuclear membranes (INM and ONM), respectively. These proteins interact with each other in the intermembrane space via their C-terminal SUN and KASH domains ([McGee et al., 2006](#R33); [Kracklauer et al., 2007](#R25)). The N-terminal domains of SUN proteins face the nucleoplasmic side of the INM, interacting with the nuclear lamina or with chromatin ([Bray et al., 2002](#R5); [Hodzic et al., 2004](#R19); [King et al., 2008](#R24); [Xiong et al., 2008](#R56)). N-terminal domains of KASH proteins typically face the cytoplasm, and interact with components of the actin or microtubule filament systems ([Starr and Han, 2002](#R42); [Zhang et al., 2002](#R57); [Fischer et al., 2004](#R10); [Wilhelmsen et al., 2005](#R53); [Ketema et al., 2007](#R23)). A detailed model for the mechanism by which the _Caenorhabditis elegans_ KASH protein ZYG-12 links the zygotic centrosome to the nuclear envelope (NE) has been proposed ([Malone et al., 2003](#R31)), which involves direct interaction of certain ZYG-12 isoforms with the microtubule motor dynein.

The _Drosophila_ genome encodes two KASH protein genes, _klarsicht_ ([Mosley-Bishop et al., 1999](#R34)) and _msp-300_ ([Zhang et al., 2002](#R57)) and two SUN protein genes, _klaroid_ ([Kracklauer et al., 2007](#R25)) and gene _CG6589. CG6589_, previously termed _giacomo_, has proved to have sequence homology to the testis-specific mammalian SUN protein Spag4 ([Shao et al., 1999](#R41); [Kennedy et al., 2004](#R22)) (supplementary material Fig. S1) and thus we have re-named the gene _spag4_. We show here that Spag4 has a crucial role in spermatogenesis comparable to that of other SUN proteins: it is necessary for anchoring the centriole or basal body (BB) to the spermatid nucleus. But surprisingly, this role does not require formation of a typical LINC complex with a KASH protein. Instead, we have shown that the coiled-coil cytoplasmic protein Yuri Gagarin ([Armstrong et al., 2006](#R4); [Texada et al., 2008](#R46)) is an essential component of the Spag4-BB anchoring mechanism, and that regulation of dynein-dynactin localization by Spag4 has a role in the process.

## Results

### Spliced _spag4_ mRNA is found only in testes and encodes a transmembrane domain protein

We first analyzed the expression of _spag4_ mRNA by RT-PCR, and observed that spliced mRNA is found only in male larvae, pupae and adults ([Fig. 1A](#F1)), suggesting testis-specific expression. Expression of _spag4_ mRNA characterized at [www.flyatlas.org](http://www.flyatlas.org/) confirms this testis specificity. In situ hybridization demonstrated that _spag4_ mRNA expression peaks in the early primary spermatocyte region of adult testes ([Fig. 1B](#F1)). Low levels of the unspliced precursor transcript were observed in females ([Fig. 1A](#F1)), but appear to be functionless given the viability and fertility of _spag4_\-null females (see below).

Although all SUN proteins described to date have a transmembrane (TM) domain N-terminal to the SUN domain ([Hagan and Yanagida, 1995](#R17); [Malone et al., 1999](#R30); [Shao et al., 1999](#R41); [Dreger et al., 2001](#R9); [Malone et al., 2003](#R31); [Hodzic et al., 2004](#R19); [Kracklauer et al., 2007](#R25); [Liu et al., 2007](#R28)), the originally annotated Spag4 protein sequence contains no TM domain ([Tweedie et al., 2009](#R50)). Using 5′ RNA-ligase-mediated rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RLM-RACE), we identified 5′ _spag4_ mRNA sequences encoding an N-terminus with a single TM helix ([Fig. 1C](#F1)). 3′ RACE also revealed a previously uncharacterized 3′ UTR. The corrected _spag4_ gene region spans ~1.2 kb of genomic DNA ([Fig. 1C](#F1)).

### _spag4_ mutant males are sterile

To determine the function of _spag4_, we generated knockout mutations by ends-out homologous recombination ([Fig. 1D,E](#F1), and Materials and Methods). Homozygous mutant individuals developed normally, yielding adults that were wild type in appearance. However, mutant males \[either homozygous or in _trans_ to deficiency _Df(2L)Prl_\] were completely sterile ([Fig. 1F](#F1)). _spag4_\-null males courted, mounted and copulated with females (data not shown), suggesting that male sterility is not a behavioral defect. Mutant females were fertile, consistent with a lack of _spag4_ mRNA splicing in females. Male fertility was restored to _spag4_ mutants by introducing a single copy of a 4.9 kb genomic _spag4_ transgene ([Fig. 1F](#F1) and supplementary material Fig. S3). A transgene generating Spag4 protein lacking the SUN domain (supplementary material Fig. S3) did not restore fertility to _spag4_\-null males ([Fig. 1F](#F1)), indicating that Spag4 requires this domain for its role in spermatogenesis.

### Dynamic Spag4 subcellular localization during gametogenesis

To address how Spag4 contributes to male gametogenesis, we examined protein localization in the testis using flies expressing Spag4 tagged C-terminally with 6×MYC or GFP. Transgenes similar to the _spag4_ rescue construct containing these tags (supplementary material Fig. S3) restored fertility to _spag4_ males, indicating that the tagged genes have wild-type function and that the tagged proteins are likely to localize normally. All independent insertions of both transgenes produced identical localization patterns. In general, Spag4:6×MYC gave stronger signals, but for mature sperm in the seminal vesicle, the Spag4:GFP signal was more robust ([Fig. 2J](#F2)). Most data shown here derives from Spag4:6×MYC.

In the _Drosophila_ testis, germ cells are arranged in a spatio-temporal order, from the apical tip to the basal seminal vesicle. Consistent with the in situ hybridization results, Spag4:6×MYC was not detectable at the apical tip, where germ-line stem cells and spermatogonia reside ([Fig. 1B](#F1), [Fig. 2A](#F2)). Four rounds of synchronous divisions yield 16 interconnected spermatogonia, encapsulated in a cyst. These spermatogonia become spermatocytes and commit to meiosis, resulting in 64 interconnected round spermatids. Spag4:6×MYC was first detected in primary spermatocytes where it was associated closely with the NE, as demonstrated by colocalization with lamin (supplementary material Fig. S4D-F). Spag4:6×MYC remained at the NE as nuclei became grooved and lobular during primary spermatocyte growth ([Fig. 2B](#F2)). Upon NE breakdown, Spag4:6×MYC colocalized with subsets of microtubules in the meiosis I spindles ([Fig. 2C](#F2); supplementary material Fig. S4A-C), and possibly the parafusorial membranes ([Fuller, 1993](#R12)). In late meiosis II, Spag4:6×MYC again associated with spindle microtubules (supplementary material Fig. S4A′-C′) cupping the astral region of re-forming nuclei ([Fig. 2D](#F2)). As post-meiotic round spermatids formed, Spag4:6×MYC once again localized to the NE ([Fig. 2E](#F2)).

Once meiosis is complete, the single centriole of each round spermatid attaches to its nuclear surface, and dramatic morphological changes commence. The centriole differentiates into the BB, from which the axoneme develops, and the nuclei elongate and condense to a needle-like shape. The Spag4:6×MYC protein at the NE initially transformed into a hemispherical cap (the ‘cap’) with the centriole at its apex ([Fig. 2F](#F2)). Subsequently, on the elongating nuclei, Spag4:6×MYC assumed a two-component pattern, with a focus of the protein at the centriole or BB attachment site, and a stripe of protein along the long axis of the nuclei (the ‘stripe’). From EM studies, Tokuyasu ([Tokuyasu, 1974](#R48)) identified electron-dense material, termed the dense complex, which initially formed as a pericentriolar hemispherical cap on round spermatid nuclei and was later present as a stripe rich in microtubules along the length of the elongating nuclei. That the stripe of Spag4:6×MYC is at the position of the dense complex was established by colocalization in testes expressing α-tubulin:GFP ([Fig. 2G-G″](#F2)). As elongation proceeded, the Spag4:6×MYC stripe along the dense complex gradually disappeared, and the focus at the BB became more compact and assumed a distinctive trefoil or bell shape ([Fig. 2H](#F2)). As shown by colocalization with the pancentriolar marker YFP:Asl ([Varmark et al., 2007](#R51)) ([Fig. 2I-I″](#F2)), this focus of Spag4 protein was between the caudal nuclear tip and BB, thus placing it at the ~0.5 μm indentation (the ‘dent’) in the nucleus in which the BB sits ([Tokuyasu, 1975](#R49)). Spag4:GFP persisted on sperm nuclei in the seminal vesicle ([Fig. 2J](#F2)), as did YFP:Asl ([Fig. 2K](#F2)), suggesting that Spag4 remains at the BB attachment site in mature sperm.

This dynamic pattern of Spag4 localization is unusual; other SUN proteins localize specifically to the NE ([Malone et al., 1999](#R30); [Malone et al., 2003](#R31); [Hodzic et al., 2004](#R19); [Kracklauer et al., 2007](#R25); [Liu et al., 2007](#R28)), microtubules ([Shao et al., 1999](#R41)) or the MTOC or SPB ([Hagan and Yanagida, 1995](#R17); [Xiong et al., 2008](#R56)). However, this range of localizations for Spag4 might be more a property of the developmental process in question rather than the protein. So far, other SUN proteins have been studied in less complex developmental situations.

### The initial defect in _spag4_ mutant males is failure of centriole-nuclear attachment

To address the role of Spag4 during sperm development, we analyzed spermatogenesis in the _spag4_\-null mutant. Our goal was to identify the first detectable defects caused by the mutation, because later problems might be secondary to these initial failures. Despite the association of Spag4 with the NE of the primary spermatocyte, in the _spag4_ mutant, the primary spermatocyte stage appeared similar to the wild type ([Fig. 3A,D](#F3)). However, beginning in the round spermatid stage, some disruption of the centriole linkage was detectable ([Fig. 3B,E](#F3)), which became pronounced and fully penetrant as the nuclei condensed and elongated. In contrast to the wild type ([Fig. 3C](#F3)), in all elongate _spag4_ mutant nuclear bundles examined, BBs labelled with YFP:Asl had lost their normal association with the caudal nuclear tips and were scattered along the nuclear bundles (NBs) ([Fig. 3G](#F3)). Furthermore, every NB observed showed some degree of dispersion within the cysts, and the scattered nuclei frequently curled in the terminal region of the testis ([Fig. 3H](#F3)). These findings indicate that Spag4 is required to maintain the correct centriole-nuclear association, and has a role in shaping elongated nuclei.

### Later defects in _spag4_ mutant spermatogenesis

In wild-type males, the seminal vesicle fills with mature sperm after several days of sequestration away from females. By contrast, no mature sperm accumulated in the seminal vesicles of sequestered _spag4_ mutant males (supplementary material Fig. S5), suggesting that developmental processes subsequent to BB-nuclear interaction also fail in the mutant. We thus investigated events during individualization, the process immediately following elongation. During individualization, elongated, syncytially connected spermatids are separated into individual sperm. An individualization complex (IC) composed of 64 actin cones that assemble around individual sperm nuclei forms, and then moves along the cyst towards the caudal ends of the spermatids ([Hicks et al., 1999](#R18); [Noguchi and Miller, 2003](#R36); [Noguchi et al., 2008](#R37)). As the IC moves along the cyst, each spermatid becomes surrounded by plasma membrane, and excess cytoplasm is pushed as a cytoplasmic bulge to the caudal tip of the cyst to form a ‘waste bag’. Using TEM to analyze cross-sections of testes, we found that _spag4_ mutants had defective individualization. In the wild type, cross-sections reveal an iterative pattern of individualized spermatids, each with a single axoneme and major and minor mitochondrial derivative (MD) surrounded by plasma membrane ([Fig. 4D](#F4)). In _spag4_ mutant cysts, arrays of axonemes each associated with a single major and minor MD were also seen ([Fig. 4E](#F4)). Furthermore, although axoneme structure was not analyzed in detail, it appeared grossly normal, with a small number of axonemes lacking the central microtubule doublets (typically less than 10 axonemes/cyst). However, both MDs showed failure to condense fully, a problem that was most marked for the minor MD. But most strikingly, plasma membrane investment largely failed to occur ([Fig. 4D,E](#F4)) and copious amounts of cytoplasm remained in the mutant cysts ([Fig. 4E](#F4)). Thus, sperm individualization and cytoplasmic elimination are severely affected in the _spag4_ mutant.

A spatially controlled caspase cascade used in a non-apoptotic context promotes spermatid individualization ([Huh et al., 2004](#R20); [Muro et al., 2006](#R35)). We found that caspase activation, as monitored with an antibody (anti-CM1) that recognizes the active form of the _Drosophila_ effector caspase Ice ([Arama et al., 2003](#R3); [Muro et al., 2006](#R35); [Zhong and Belote, 2007](#R58)), was similar in _spag4_ mutant and wild-type testes (supplementary material Fig. S6A-B′). Successful activation of caspase was further confirmed by staining testes with Acridine Orange, a dye taken up by cysts undergoing individualization. (supplementary material Fig. S6A″,B″) ([Arama and Steller, 2006](#R2)). Thus, defective individualization in the mutant is not due to defective caspase activation. Instead, the defects appear to originate in aberrant formation of ICs. In the _spag4_ mutant, the individual actin cones were disrupted, with cones no longer forming organized ICs ([Fig. 4A,B](#F4)). In bundles of contorted nuclei, actin cones were often missing altogether ([Fig. 4C](#F4)). The disorganized ICs tended not to progress caudally, and mutant testes lacked cytoplasmic bulges and waste bags, indicating failures in individualization (supplementary material Fig. S6). Despite failed individualization, the elongated syncytial cysts in _spag4_ mutants attempted the final coiling process that precedes sperm movement into the seminal vesicle: the terminal region of mutant testes thus filled with coiling cysts (supplementary material Fig. S5D).

### Phenotype comparisons suggest interactions with _yuri_ and _dynein-dynactin_ but not known KASH proteins

_spag4_ encodes a SUN protein and localizes to the NE during most of spermatogenesis. Furthermore, the SUN domain is essential for the role of _spag4_ in male fertility ([Fig. 1F](#F1)). These findings suggest that Spag4 functions as a typical SUN protein, forming a LINC complex with a KASH protein partner. However, our data indicate that neither of the two _Drosophila_ KASH proteins (Klarsicht and MSP-300) is a Spag4 partner in the testis. For both genes, mutations that eliminate the KASH domain are available: _msp300_Δ_KASH_ was generated by ends-out recombination ([Xie and Fischer, 2008](#R55)) and the _klarCD4_ mutation came from EMS mutagenesis that generated a suitably positioned stop codon ([Mosley-Bishop et al., 1999](#R34); [Fischer et al., 2004](#R10); [Guo et al., 2005](#R16)). Mutant males of both genotypes were fertile ([Fig. 5A](#F5)) and in all cysts examined for _msp300_Δ_KASH_ males, _klarCD4_ males and _msp300_Δ_KASH; klarCD4_ double-mutant males, (44-95 cysts in 10 testes per genotype), the centrioles remained associated with the spermatid nuclei during elongation ([Fig. 5B-D](#F5)) and nuclear bundling, IC formation and IC progression were normal. There was no heterozygous effect of the _spag4_\-null genotype on the fertility of _klarCD4_ mutant males ([Fig. 5A](#F5)) and the only aberrancy detected in the spermatid cysts of these various genotypes was the occasional apical mislocalization of nuclear bundles in _klarCD4_ and _msp300_Δ_KASH; klarCD4_ double-mutant males (data not shown). The doubly mutant males were somewhat subfertile ([Fig. 5A](#F5)), but this probably reflects defects in the testis sheath (data not shown) that are not found in the singly mutant males.

By contrast, both the male sterile phenotype of _spag4_ and the post-meiotic localization pattern of Spag4:6×MYC are compellingly similar to findings for a male sterile mutation of the _yuri_ locus (_yuriF64_) and for Yuri nuclear localization ([Texada et al., 2008](#R46)). _yuri_ is a complex locus encoding three major classes of ubiquitously expressed isoforms. The longer isoforms largely consist of coiled-coil regions. The _yuriF64_ mutation eliminates expression of the middle size Yuri isoforms globally, but, uniquely in the testis, the shortest isoform is also not expressed. This loss of two isoforms in the testis might explain the observation that the _yuriF64_ mutant exhibits male sterility, but no other developmental phenotype. An antibody that detects all isoforms showed Yuri accumulation in the postmeiotic nuclear cap, dent and stripe patterns exactly as described above for Spag4 and confirmed here by localization ([Fig. 5B-D](#F5), [Fig. 6](#F6)) and colocalization (supplementary material Fig. S7) studies. In _yuriF64_, this nuclear localization of Yuri was absent and, as in the _spag4_\-null, the centrioles lost their normal attachments to the post-meiotic nuclei and the NBs became disorganized, with nuclei forming curled, distorted shapes. Similar defects in late spermatogenesis were also shared by _yuriF64_ and _spag4_\-null flies, including failure of actin cone formation and individualization, aberrant MD condensation, abortive coiling and absence of mature sperm in the seminal vesicle.

Although Yuri contains neither a transmembrane nor a KASH domain, these data clearly suggest that Spag4 and Yuri are components of the same pathway for centriolar-nuclear association. Furthermore, previous findings for cytoplasmic dynein suggest that it also has a role in this process ([Li et al., 2004](#R26)). Dynein accumulates in the cap pattern on round spermatid nuclei seen for Spag4:6×MYC and Yuri, and loss of this dynein cap in a null mutation of dynein light chain gene _Dlc90F_ results in failure of centriole-nucleus association. We therefore investigated the interactions between these three components further.

### Interactions between _spag4_, _yuri_ and _dynein_ components

As shown above, Spag4 accumulated on the NE of primary spermatocytes, and then decorated the spindle during meiosis. Yuri localization was not determined during these early stages previously ([Texada et al., 2008](#R46)), and was thus investigated as part of this work. We discovered that although Yuri was present on the primary spermatocyte NEs in some spermatocyte cysts ([Fig. 6B](#F6)), it was not present at all stages, suggesting that its presence there is regulated. On round spermatid nuclei, Yuri and Spag4 both formed centriolar caps ([Fig. 6C,D](#F6)), and the proteins colocalized to the stripe and dent in elongating spermatids (supplementary material Fig. S7; [Fig. 6E,F,F′](#F6)).

In contrast to Spag4:6×MYC, Yuri was not detected on the meiotic spindles, and showed diffuse cytoplasmic staining during these divisions. However, Yuri was sometimes detected associated with the centrioles at the NE immediately before meiosis I (data not shown), and routinely Yuri localized to a circumferential ring on the single centrioles at the meiosis II spindle poles (supplementary material Fig. S8). In _spag4_\-null flies, Yuri was never detected on the NE of primary spermatocytes, but now could be found on some of the V-shaped centriole pairs at the periphery of these cells ([Fig. 6G](#F6)). No obvious new localization of Yuri emerged during meiosis. But strikingly, the post-meiotic positioning of Yuri relative to the spermatid nuclei and centrioles was dramatically altered in the _spag4_ mutant. All elements of the usual nuclear pattern – the cap, dent and stripe – were lost ([Fig. 6H,I](#F6)), and at the onset of nuclear elongation, Yuri began to accumulate ectopically on the dissociating centrioles ([Fig. 6I](#F6)). During elongation, as the centrioles become BBs, the toroid-shaped centriolar adjunct (CA) develops around the rod-like core of the BB ([Texada et al., 2008](#R46)). γ-tubulin is confined to the CA and thus provides an excellent marker for these toroid structures. Using Yuri and γ-tubulin staining, we determined that Yuri not only accumulated on the rod of the BB proper but also frequently coated the outer surface of the CA ([Fig. 6I′](#F6)).

Conversely, in the _yuriF64_ mutant, Spag4:6×MYC accumulation on the primary spermatocyte NEs, the meiotic spindles, and in the cap and stripe remained unaltered ([Fig. 6J,K,L](#F6)). However, one element of the Spag4 distribution pattern was lost: Spag4:6×MYC no longer accumulated at the dent representing the BB attachment site ([Fig. 6L](#F6)). Thus, with the exception of this site, the interactions between the two proteins are very similar to those predicted for a SUN-KASH protein pair.

The effect of loss of the dynein cap at the round spermatid stage (in a _Dlc90F_\-null mutant) on the nuclear location of Yuri was reported by Texada and co-workers ([Texada et al., 2008](#R46)). Notably, the effect is similar to that described here upon loss of Spag4: the Yuri cap is strongly reduced, the stripe and dent components never develop, and Yuri accumulates on the BB proper. Thus both _spag4_ and dynein have a role in positioning Yuri on the NE. That Yuri has no role in positioning dynein was determined by examining the location of p50:GFP, a tagged subunit of a dynactin, which is a well-established dynein interaction partner ([Wojcik et al., 2001](#R54)). p50:GFP shows identical localization to dynein at the nucleus and meiotic spindles during spermatogenesis ([Li et al., 2004](#R26); [Anderson et al., 2009](#R1)), including accumulation in the cap on round spermatid nuclei. In the _yuriF64_ mutant, this localization pattern for p50:GFP on the spermatid nuclei remained unchanged ([Fig. 7G](#F7)).

Throughout spermatogenesis, Spag4:6×MYC localization was unaffected in the _Dlc90Fe155_\-null mutant ([Fig. 7A-C](#F7)), indicating that dynein has no role in Spag4 positioning at the NE. But conversely, results for p50:GFP suggest that _spag4_ has a role in the localization of dynein-dynactin both before and after meiosis. In _spag4_\-null primary spermatocytes, p50:GFP accumulation at the nuclear membrane was lost and instead, similarly to localization of Yuri, p50:GFP accumulated on the paired centrioles at the spermatocyte periphery (data not shown). Likewise, p50:GFP was not detected in the hemispherical cap on round spermatids in _spag4_\-null flies, but again, similarly to Yuri in the _spag4_ mutant background, accumulated on the BB ([Fig. 7E](#F7)), However, at this stage, the p50:GFP accumulation pattern on the BB was distinct from that of Yuri. All of the p50:GFP was associated with the CA torus, upon which it formed a distinctive pattern of dots around the circumference of the structure ([Fig. 7F](#F7)). These findings indicate that Spag4 is required to bring dynein-dynactin to the nuclear membrane, whereas Yuri, by contrast, requires dynein-dynactin for its accumulation there. A pathway in which the order of gene action is _spag4_\-_dynein-dynactin_\-_yuri_ is thus in operation. This model suggests that Spag4 and dynein-dynactin, and Yuri and dynein-dynactin should be simultaneously present at the nuclear surface. Colocalization studies established that these pairs of proteins and all three components together could be detected simultaneously on primary spermatocyte and round spermatid nuclei (supplementary material Fig. S9).

## Discussion

### Spag4 functions independently of a LINC complex

In this study, we describe the role of Spag4, a _Drosophila_ SUN protein. Spag4 is primarily required for linking the centriole and later the BB, two forms of the MTOC of the spermatid, to the nucleus of the elongating spermatid during spermatogenesis. In other contexts, KASH proteins are the essential partners of SUN proteins, forming LINC complexes that tether centrosomes to the NE. However, in single and double mutants of the two KASH protein genes of _Drosophila_ lacking the KASH domain, centriole attachment to the spermatid nucleus is normal. Thus Spag4 appears to mediate this interaction by a mechanism that does not involve a typical LINC complex. Consistent with this notion, we have found that Spag4 localization on elongated spermatid nuclei is independent of lamin (supplementary material Fig. S10D), which in other contexts is essential for NE localization of LINC complexes. _Dictyostelium discoideum_ cells lack a nuclear lamina, and the SUN protein Sun-1 is thought to interact with chromatin directly ([Xiong et al., 2008](#R56)). Mature sperm also lack a normal nuclear lamina, suggesting that Spag4 might also directly link to chromatin. These unusual features of Spag4 might partly reflect the highly specialized centriole-nuclear interaction that it facilitates. As the _Drosophila_ spermatid centriole differentiates into the BB, complex structural rearrangements occur, followed in the final stages by altered relative positioning of the BB and the nucleus ([Tokuyasu, 1974](#R48); [Tokuyasu, 1975](#R49)).

### Spag4 and Yuri are components of a postmeiotic pathway for maintaining the centriole at the spermatid nucleus

In contrast to the KASH proteins, our studies have identified the coiled-coil protein Yuri as an essential component of the postmeiotic Spag4 centriole-tethering pathway. In the post-meiotic stages, Yuri shows identical nuclear positioning to Spag4, and Spag4 is essential for localization of Yuri to its various nuclear sites. These observations place Yuri downstream of Spag4 in the pathway. However, at the nuclear dent, in which the BB sits, there is mutual dependence between the two proteins for correct localization.

In addition to this post-meiotic pathway, a pre-meiotic mechanism exists to bring the centriole pairs of the primary spermatocyte to the NE for function in meiosis. The gene _asunder_ (_asun_) is required for this process, which involves accumulation of Asun itself, and Asun-dependent accumulation of dynein (and p50:GFP) at the primary spermatocyte NE ([Anderson et al., 2009](#R1)). As we show here, both Spag4 and Yuri also associate with the primary spermatocyte NE, with localization of Yuri there being Spag4-dependent. However, in contrast to an _asun_ mutant, no defects in meiosis were found in _yuriF64_ or _spag4_\-null spermatocytes. Thus, no immediate role for the two proteins in pre-meiotic centriole-nuclear association can be postulated. During meiosis, Spag4 is associated with the spindle and astral microtubules. Although a role for SUN proteins in tethering telomeres to the NE during meiosis has been described ([Ding et al., 2007](#R8); [Penkner et al., 2007](#R39)), we could not detect altered telomere distribution in _spag4_\-null meiosis (data not shown). The functions of Yuri and Spag4 in these early stages are thus obscure. Association of Spag4 with the spindle could simply represent a storage location.

### The interaction of Yuri and Spag4 in relation to nuclear membrane topology

If Spag4 were a typical SUN protein, its transmembrane domain would traverse the INM, placing its C-terminus in the intermembrane space to interact with a KASH-domain protein spanning the ONM. However none of the isoforms of Yuri has either a transmembrane domain or KASH domain, indicating that a direct interaction between the two proteins in the intermembrane space is unlikely. Thus, despite our evidence that the two known _Drosophila_ KASH proteins have no role here, it seems likely that some other ONM protein is needed to bring Yuri and Spag4 together. Our findings on the role of cytoplasmic dynein-dynactin also make a direct interaction of Yuri and Spag4 unlikely. The order of gene action in the pathway appears to be _spag4_–_dynein-dynactin_–_yuri_, again probably precluding a direct Spag4-Yuri interaction.

Given these indications of indirect interaction, it is pertinent to ask where Yuri is localized relative to the NE. Previous EM studies (A. D. Tates, PhD thesis, Leiden University, 1971; [Tokuyasu, 1974](#R48)) have shown that the initial cap component of the dense complex forms in a tight compartment between the nuclear membranes proper and a layer of closely apposed ER tubule. In other tissues, we have established that Yuri shows a strong association with the ER rather than the nuclear membranes per se (Michael J. Texada, Rebecca A. Simonette and William J. Deery, unpublished results). It seems likely therefore that Yuri is not bound to the nuclear membranes, but rather is in close apposition to them through association with the overlying ER. If Spag4 is in the inner nuclear membrane, and Yuri in the overlying ER, several components, including an ONM protein and dynein-dynactin, probably link the two proteins. However, given its unusual interactions, Spag4 might not reside in the INM and thus fewer intermediates might be in play.

### Differing molecular activities at the dent and the stripe

The pathway described above is adequate to address the relationship of Yuri and Spag4 at most elements of their nuclear-localization patterns. However, at the dent, further interactions must be invoked, because at this site, localization of the two proteins is mutually dependent. This role of Yuri in positioning Spag4 is unlikely to involve dynein-dynactin, because Yuri has no effect on the localization of p50:GFP(dynactin) at the nuclear surface. Thus additional molecular interactions must take place. Yuri has three isoforms, and it is possible that at this site, an isoform not active at the other locations is in operation (see further discussion below). Our antibody detects all Yuri isoforms, and thus provides no information on individual isoform location.

The different molecular activities at the dent and stripe might reflect different roles for the proteins at these two locations. The dent is closely associated with the BB, and at this site the two proteins function in centriole retention and maturation. The stripe is far removed from this position, and it has been suggested that it might strengthen the nuclei along their long axes during elongation and chromatin condensation ([Tokuyasu, 1974](#R48)). Consistent with this possibility, in both the _yuriF64_ and the _spag4_ mutants, the fully elongated nuclei are frequently coiled and distorted along their long axis. The stripe contains microtubules, and interestingly, there is evidence that the stripe microtubules represent a distinct class of structures that do not originate from the BB (Tatsuhiko Noguchi, unpublished results).

### Similarities to the SUN1-ZYG-12 interaction pair – different roles for Yuri isoforms?

In some ways Yuri is comparable with the KASH protein ZYG-12, which tethers the centrosome to the nucleus in the _Caenorhabditis elegans_ zygote by a mechanism involving dynein ([Malone et al., 2003](#R31)). Similarly to Yuri, ZYG-12 is a coiled-coil protein with three isoforms. Furthermore, the longer isoforms of Yuri contain a ~127 residue region with 24% identity and 46% similarity to the ZYG-12 isoforms (supplementary material Fig. S1B). The ZYG-12A isoform localizes to the centrosome, and the B and C isoforms localize to the NE. Direct interaction of the B and C isoforms with dynein leads to close association of the centrosome and nucleus, dimerization of B and C with the A variant, and formation of a stable centrosome-nucleus link. We detected association of Yuri with the centrioles during meiosis II, that is, immediately before Yuri begins to function in maintenance of post-meiotic centriole-nuclear attachment (supplementary material Fig. S8). Furthermore, we identified a role for dynein-dynactin in association of Yuri with the nuclear surface. Given these parallels with ZYG-12, it seems possible that the Yuri isoforms might show differential localization between the centriole and the nuclear surface, and that some Yuri isoforms interact directly with dynein. The overall similar behavior of p50:GFP and Yuri in the _spag4_ mutant supports the hypothesis of direct interaction with dynein, but at the same time indicates that Yuri is not directly associated with the dynactin component per se, because the precise localizations of Yuri and p50:GFP on the developing BB in the _spag4_\-null mutant are distinctly different (compare [Fig. 6I,I′](#F6) and [Fig. 7F](#F7)).

### Successful sperm individualization correlates with maintenance of the BB-nucleus link and with properly shaped and bundled elongated nuclei

Mutations in _yuri_ and _spag4_ result in dissociation of BBs from spermatid nuclei, subsequent curling of the elongate nuclei and finally, failure of individualization. Although BB behavior has not been examined for a mutation to Pros-α6T (a testis-specific proteasome subunit), nevertheless, curled, mislocalized spermatid nuclei are found in this mutant along with aberrant actin cone formation and failed individualization ([Zhong and Belote, 2007](#R58)). Therefore, results for _spag4, yuri_ and _Pros_\-α_6T_ suggest that dissociation of BB from the nuclei and/or contortion of elongated nuclei correlate with failed IC formation and progression.

How BB detachment from nuclei and nuclear contortion would affect formation of individual actin cones and progression of the IC is not apparent. One possibility is that components of the dense complex at the cap and/or stripe are requisite precursors for formation of actin cones. Actin cone formation begins with the deposition of F-actin filaments along the long axis of the nuclei ([Noguchi et al., 2008](#R37)). The dense complex materials at the cap and the stripe contain F-actin, and this F-actin is lost in _yuriF64_ ([Texada et al., 2008](#R46)). EM examination of the formation of F-actin filaments on the final nuclei of the _spag4, yuriF64_ and _Pros_\-α_6T_ mutants would address this issue. The male sterile mutation _ms(3)72D_ also produces contorted spermatid nuclei ([Castrillon et al., 1993](#R6)) and might thus also be defective in BB-nuclear attachment, actin cone and IC formation, and sperm individualization.

In summary, we have identified Spag4 as a component of a centriolar-nuclear attachment pathway in spermatogenesis that also requires the coiled-coil protein Yuri and cytoplasmic dynein-dynactin. Although Spag4 is a SUN protein, its action in this pathway appears not to involve a conventional KASH protein. The disruption of the later stages of spermatogenesis in _yuri_ and _spag4_ mutants might be secondary to the general disruption of events at the spermatid nuclear surface produced in these mutants.

## Materials and Methods

### _Drosophila_ stocks

Transgenic lines were prepared by standard methods at UT Austin or at Genetic Services (Sudbury, MA). Standard genetic crosses were used to introduce: (1) transgenes _pC4-spag4, pC4-spag4_:_gfp, pC4-spag4_:_6xmyc, pC4-spag4-SUNstop_ and _p50:GFP_ into the background of _spag4_\-knockout allele #6 and (2) _pC4-spag4_:_6xmyc_ and _p50:GFP_ into the _yuriF64_ background. _p50:GFP_ and _Dlc90Fe155/TMB Tb_ were obtained from Thomas Hays, University of Minnesota, MN, USA. _w,_ α_Tub_:_gfp, w, yfp_:_asl_ lines ([Rebollo et al., 2004](#R40); [Varmark et al., 2007](#R51)) and the deficiency spanning _spag4 Df(2L)Prl_, were obtained from Cayetano Gonzalez, Institute for Research and Biomedicine, Barcelona, Spain and the _Drosophila_ Stock Center (Bloomington), respectively.

### Molecular biology

Molecular biology manipulations were performed using standard techniques. Unless specified, SuperScript II RT reagents and Platinum PCR Supermix (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) were used, and primers from Integrated DNA Technologies (Coralville, IA). Primer sequences are provided in supplementary material Fig. S2. DNA sequencing was performed at the UT Austin ICMB Core Facility.

### Expression analysis of _spag4_

Total RNA from ten male or female larvae, pupae and adults was isolated and treated with DNase I, as described ([Kracklauer et al., 2007](#R25)). RT was performed using an oligo (dT) primer followed by PCR with primers P1 and P2.

### Determination of _spag4_ cDNA ends by RACE

RT-PCR was carried out using male pupal total RNA isolated as recommended in the FirstChoice RLM-RACE kit protocol (Ambion, Austin, TX), and then used in 5′ RLM-RACE and 3′ RACE. The 5′ end of the gene was amplified using the RNA adapter-specific forward outer and inner primers, and the gene-specific reverse primer P3. To amplify the 3′ end of the gene, anchored oligo-(dT) adapter primers from the FirstChoice kit were used in RT. In the PCR, the gene-specific forward primer P4 and the 3′ adapter-specific outer primer were used. 5′ and 3′ RACE products were subcloned into pGEM-T-Easy (Promega, Madison, WI) and their sequences verified. A complete _spag4_ cDNA with 5′ and 3′ UTRs was generated by PCR using a mixture of partially overlapping RACE products as template and the 5′ and 3′ adapter-specific primers. The final PCR product was subcloned into pGEM-T-Easy, sequenced and catalogued as [EF537040](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/EF537040) at NCBI.

### Construction of _spag4_ genomic transgenes

The transgene _pC4-spag4_ was generated by ligating the _spag4_ coding region as a 4.9 kb _Pst_I fragment from _BACR02J20_ into the _Pst_I site of _pCaSpEr-4_ (pC4) ([Thummel and Pirrotta, 1992](#R47)). The GFP-tagged version, _pC4-spag4_:_gfp,_ was generated by ligating the GFP ORF from _pUAST-gfp_ ([Kracklauer et al., 2007](#R25)) immediately downstream of the _spag4_ coding region in _pC4-spag4_. For this purpose, an _Asc_I site was introduced immediately upstream of the _spag4_ stop codon using the QuikChange II PCR Mutagenesis Kit (Stratagene) and primer pair P13-P14. The GFP ORF with _Asc_I sites on both ends (generated by PCR using primers P11-P12 on the _pUAST-gfp_ template) was then cloned into this _Asc_I site. To generate _pC4-spag4_:_6xmyc_, a _6xmyc_ ORF was amplified from the _pUAST-6xmyc_ vector ([Kracklauer et al., 2007](#R25)) using the PCR primers P15 and P16, and the ORF was then cloned into the _Asc_I site as for _pC4-spag4_:_GFP_. To generate _pC4-spag4SUNstop_, a stop codon was introduced into the 4.9 kb _Pst_I fragment using the mutagenic primers P21-P22, and the resulting mutated fragment was cloned into the _Pst_I site of _pC4_ as described above.

### Generation of _spag4_ knockout

The targeting construct (_pW35-spag4HRKO_) was generated as follows. DNA sequences of ~3 kb (upstream) and ~5 kb (downstream) flanking the _spag4_ coding region were amplified by PCR using hot-start Herculase (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA), primer sets P5-P6 and P7-P8, and _BAC02J20_ (Open Biosystems, Huntsville, AL) as template. PCR products were subcloned into pGEM-T-Easy and their sequences verified. The upstream 3 kb fragment was excised from pGEM-T-Easy with _Not_I and cloned into that site of _pW35_ ([Gong and Golic, 2003](#R14)). The downstream 5 kb fragment was excised from pGEM-T-Easy with _Bam_HI and _Avr_II, then cloned into those sites in _pW35_ downstream of the _w_+ marker gene, resulting in _pW35-spag4HRKO_. After generation of transgenic lines, a cross of 500 _y w, pW35 spag4HRKO_/_FM7c, gfp_ virgin females with 500 _(y) w;; \[hs-FLP\],\[hs-I-SceI\]/TM3, Sb_ males was set up with subsequent embryo manipulation and heat shocks, as described previously ([Kracklauer et al., 2007](#R25)). ~400 crosses of 3-4 _w_+\-mosaic _(y) w, pW35-spag4HRKO/+;; \[hs-FLP\],\[hs-I-SceI\]/_\+ F1 virgin females and 3-4 _w; hs-FLP_ males were performed. F2 progeny were screened for a single male from each cross with solid _w_+ eyes, indicative of targeted insertion events. Insertions were mapped for 100 independent F2 candidate knockout males using standard methods; for 87 candidates, the insertion mapped to chromosome 2 as expected. For ~50 such stocks, _spag4_ targeting was assessed by Southern blotting ([Kracklauer et al., 2007](#R25)). Ultimately, five independent _spag4_ knockout alleles – 1, 6, 11, 12 and 15 – were isolated. Allele 6 was used for most studies.

### Quantitative fertility assays

Twenty individual _spag4_ homozygous _or spag4/Df(2L)Prl_ males were each crossed to two _w1118_ virgins. As a control, 20 crosses using _w1118_ males homozygous for a wild-type (Oregon-R) copy of chromosome 2 (_w1118;ORC2iso_) were set up. For the fertility rescue assays, 20 individual _spag4_ homozygous males bearing a single copy of the transgene _pC4-spag4_, _pC4-spag4_:_gfp_, _pC4-spag4_:_6xmyc_ or _pC4-spag4-SUNstop_ were used. To assay female fertility, 20 virgin _spag4_ homozygous or _spag4/Df(2L)Prl_ females were assayed individually with two _w1118_ males. Similar crosses with _w1118; ORC2iso_ virgin females were set up in parallel as wild-type controls. After 1 week, average combined numbers of larvae and pupae per vial were determined.

### TEM

Testes were fixed on ice for 2 hours in PBS with 2% glutaraldehyde \[Electron Microscopy Sciences (EMS), Hatfield, PA\], rinsed, then post-fixed at room temperature for 2 hours in 2% OsO4 (EMS) and 0.8% K3\[Fe(CN)6\] in 1× symcollidine buffer ([McDonald, 1984](#R32); [Jinguji and Ishikawa, 1990](#R21)). Tissues were then dehydrated and embedded in resin using standard procedures. 50-60 nm sections were cut, stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate and examined with a Philips EM208 electron microscope.

### Immunocytology

Testes were fixed and stained essentially as described ([Lin et al., 1996](#R27); [Zhong and Belote, 2007](#R58); [Texada et al., 2008](#R46)), and mounted in VectaShield (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) or 50% glycerol. Primary antibody dilutions were as follows: mouse anti-MYC, 1:2000; rabbit anti-MYC, 1:200; rabbit anti-CM1, 1:100 (all from Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA); rabbit anti-Vasa, 1:200 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA); mouse anti-γ-tubulin, 1:500 (Sigma) and chicken anti-Yuri, 1:400 ([Texada et al., 2008](#R46)). Secondary antibodies were Alexa Fluor 488 anti-rabbit, Alexa Fluor 555 or Alexa Fluor 568 anti-mouse and Alexa Fluor 488 anti-chicken, all at 1:500 (Invitrogen). Alexa Fluor phalloidin (Invitrogen) to stain F-actin and TOPRO-3 to stain DNA, were mixed into secondary antibody solutions at 15 μl phalloidin/ml and 1 μl/ml TOPRO-3. DAPI for DNA staining was added to mounting solution at 1 μl/ml. Testes were imaged with Leica AOBS SP2 and Zeiss LSM 510 laser-scanning confocal microscopes and a Zeiss Axioplan microscope using Metamorph deconvolution software. Adobe Photoshop was used to process all images.

### In situ hybridization (ISH)

ISH was carried out essentially as described ([White-Cooper et al., 1998](#R52)), using an 820 bp PCR product from the _spag4_ ORF to generate sense and antisense probes by in vitro transcription with a DIG RNA Labeling Kit (Roche).

## Supplementary Material

\[Supplementary Material\]

## Acknowledgments

We are grateful to C. Schmidt for critically reviewing this manuscript, to Y. Yamashita for support, to C. Gonzalez and T. Hays for providing flies and reagents, and to K. Lea for assistance with generating the _pW35-spag4HRKO_ construct. This work was supported by a grant from the National Eye Institute (RO1-EY13958) to J.A.F and grants C-1119 from the Welch Foundation of Texas and NNX09AH43G from NASA to K.M.B. Deposited in PMC for release after 12 months.

## Footnotes

## References

1.  Anderson M. A., Jodoin J. N., Lee E., Hales K. G., Hays T. S., Lee L. A. (2009). Asunder is a critical regulator of dynein-dynactin localization during Drosophila spermatogenesis. _Mol. Biol. Cell_ 20, 2709-2721 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.E08-12-1165)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2688550/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19357193/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol.%20Biol.%20Cell&title=Asunder%20is%20a%20critical%20regulator%20of%20dynein-dynactin%20localization%20during%20Drosophila%20spermatogenesis&author=M.%20A.%20Anderson&author=J.%20N.%20Jodoin&author=E.%20Lee&author=K.%20G.%20Hales&author=T.%20S.%20Hays&volume=20&publication_year=2009&pages=2709-2721&pmid=19357193&doi=10.1091/mbc.E08-12-1165&)\]
2.  Arama E., Steller H. (2006). Detection of apoptosis by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling and acridine orange in Drosophila embryos and adult male gonads. _Nat. Protoc._ 1, 1725-1731 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2006.235)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17487155/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat.%20Protoc.&title=Detection%20of%20apoptosis%20by%20terminal%20deoxynucleotidyl%20transferase-mediated%20dUTP%20nick-end%20labeling%20and%20acridine%20orange%20in%20Drosophila%20embryos%20and%20adult%20male%20gonads&author=E.%20Arama&author=H.%20Steller&volume=1&publication_year=2006&pages=1725-1731&pmid=17487155&doi=10.1038/nprot.2006.235&)\]
3.  Arama E., Agapite J., Steller H. (2003). Caspase activity and a specific cytochrome C are required for sperm differentiation in Drosophila. _Dev. Cell_ 4, 687-697 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1534-5807\(03\)00120-5)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12737804/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Dev.%20Cell&title=Caspase%20activity%20and%20a%20specific%20cytochrome%20C%20are%20required%20for%20sperm%20differentiation%20in%20Drosophila&author=E.%20Arama&author=J.%20Agapite&author=H.%20Steller&volume=4&publication_year=2003&pages=687-697&pmid=12737804&doi=10.1016/s1534-5807\(03\)00120-5&)\]
4.  Armstrong J. D., Texada M. J., Munjaal R., Baker D. A., Beckingham K. M. (2006). Gravitaxis in Drosophila melanogaster: a forward genetic screen. _Genes Brain Behav._ 5, 222-239 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1601-183X.2005.00154.x)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16594976/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genes%20Brain%20Behav.&title=Gravitaxis%20in%20Drosophila%20melanogaster:%20a%20forward%20genetic%20screen&author=J.%20D.%20Armstrong&author=M.%20J.%20Texada&author=R.%20Munjaal&author=D.%20A.%20Baker&author=K.%20M.%20Beckingham&volume=5&publication_year=2006&pages=222-239&pmid=16594976&doi=10.1111/j.1601-183X.2005.00154.x&)\]
5.  Bray J. D., Chennathukuzhi V. M., Hecht N. B. (2002). Identification and characterization of cDNAs encoding four novel proteins that interact with translin associated factor-X. _Genomics_ 79, 799-808 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1006/geno.2002.6779)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12036294/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genomics&title=Identification%20and%20characterization%20of%20cDNAs%20encoding%20four%20novel%20proteins%20that%20interact%20with%20translin%20associated%20factor-X&author=J.%20D.%20Bray&author=V.%20M.%20Chennathukuzhi&author=N.%20B.%20Hecht&volume=79&publication_year=2002&pages=799-808&pmid=12036294&doi=10.1006/geno.2002.6779&)\]
6.  Castrillon D. H., Gonczy P., Alexander S., Rawson R., Eberhart C. G., Viswanathan S., DiNardo S., Wasserman S. A. (1993). Toward a molecular genetic analysis of spermatogenesis in Drosophila melanogaster: characterization of male-sterile mutants generated by single P element mutagenesis. _Genetics_ 135, 489-505 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/135.2.489)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1205651/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8244010/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genetics&title=Toward%20a%20molecular%20genetic%20analysis%20of%20spermatogenesis%20in%20Drosophila%20melanogaster:%20characterization%20of%20male-sterile%20mutants%20generated%20by%20single%20P%20element%20mutagenesis&author=D.%20H.%20Castrillon&author=P.%20Gonczy&author=S.%20Alexander&author=R.%20Rawson&author=C.%20G.%20Eberhart&volume=135&publication_year=1993&pages=489-505&pmid=8244010&doi=10.1093/genetics/135.2.489&)\]
7.  Crisp M., Liu Q., Roux K., Rattner J. B., Shanahan C., Burke B., Stahl P. D., Hodzic D. (2006). Coupling of the nucleus and cytoplasm: role of the LINC complex. _J. Cell Biol._ 172, 41-53 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.200509124)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2063530/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16380439/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Cell%20Biol.&title=Coupling%20of%20the%20nucleus%20and%20cytoplasm:%20role%20of%20the%20LINC%20complex&author=M.%20Crisp&author=Q.%20Liu&author=K.%20Roux&author=J.%20B.%20Rattner&author=C.%20Shanahan&volume=172&publication_year=2006&pages=41-53&pmid=16380439&doi=10.1083/jcb.200509124&)\]
8.  Ding X., Xu R., Yu J., Xu T., Zhuang Y., Han M. (2007). SUN1 is required for telomere attachment to nuclear envelope and gametogenesis in mice. _Dev. Cell_ 12, 863-872 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2007.03.018)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17543860/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Dev.%20Cell&title=SUN1%20is%20required%20for%20telomere%20attachment%20to%20nuclear%20envelope%20and%20gametogenesis%20in%20mice&author=X.%20Ding&author=R.%20Xu&author=J.%20Yu&author=T.%20Xu&author=Y.%20Zhuang&volume=12&publication_year=2007&pages=863-872&pmid=17543860&doi=10.1016/j.devcel.2007.03.018&)\]
9.  Dreger M., Bengtsson L., Schoneberg T., Otto H., Hucho F. (2001). Nuclear envelope proteomics: novel integral membrane proteins of the inner nuclear membrane. _Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA_ 98, 11943-11948 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.211201898)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC59747/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11593002/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc.%20Natl.%20Acad.%20Sci.%20USA&title=Nuclear%20envelope%20proteomics:%20novel%20integral%20membrane%20proteins%20of%20the%20inner%20nuclear%20membrane&author=M.%20Dreger&author=L.%20Bengtsson&author=T.%20Schoneberg&author=H.%20Otto&author=F.%20Hucho&volume=98&publication_year=2001&pages=11943-11948&pmid=11593002&doi=10.1073/pnas.211201898&)\]
10.  Fischer J. A., Acosta S., Kenny A., Cater C., Robinson C., Hook J. (2004). Drosophila Klarsicht has distinct subcellular localization domains for nuclear envelope and microtubule localization in the eye. _Genetics_ 168, 1385-1393 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.104.028662)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1448802/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15579692/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genetics&title=Drosophila%20Klarsicht%20has%20distinct%20subcellular%20localization%20domains%20for%20nuclear%20envelope%20and%20microtubule%20localization%20in%20the%20eye&author=J.%20A.%20Fischer&author=S.%20Acosta&author=A.%20Kenny&author=C.%20Cater&author=C.%20Robinson&volume=168&publication_year=2004&pages=1385-1393&pmid=15579692&doi=10.1534/genetics.104.028662&)\]
11.  Fischer-Vize J. A., Mosley K. L. (1994). Marbles mutants: uncoupling cell determination and nuclear migration in the developing Drosophila eye. _Development_ 120, 2609-2618 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.120.9.2609)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7956836/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Development&title=Marbles%20mutants:%20uncoupling%20cell%20determination%20and%20nuclear%20migration%20in%20the%20developing%20Drosophila%20eye&author=J.%20A.%20Fischer-Vize&author=K.%20L.%20Mosley&volume=120&publication_year=1994&pages=2609-2618&pmid=7956836&doi=10.1242/dev.120.9.2609&)\]
12.  Fuller M. T. (1993). Spermatogenesis. In _The Development of Drosophila melanogaster_, Vol. 1 (ed. Bate M., Martinez-Arias A.), pp. 71-147 New York: Cold Spring Harbor Press; \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=The%20Development%20of%20Drosophila%20melanogaster&author=M.%20T.%20Fuller&publication_year=1993&)\]
13.  Gomes E. R., Jani S., Gundersen G. G. (2005). Nuclear movement regulated by Cdc42, MRCK, myosin, and actin flow establishes MTOC polarization in migrating cells. _Cell_ 121, 451-463 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2005.02.022)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15882626/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell&title=Nuclear%20movement%20regulated%20by%20Cdc42,%20MRCK,%20myosin,%20and%20actin%20flow%20establishes%20MTOC%20polarization%20in%20migrating%20cells&author=E.%20R.%20Gomes&author=S.%20Jani&author=G.%20G.%20Gundersen&volume=121&publication_year=2005&pages=451-463&pmid=15882626&doi=10.1016/j.cell.2005.02.022&)\]
14.  Gong W. J., Golic K. G. (2003). Ends-out, or replacement, gene targeting in Drosophila. _Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA_ 100, 2556-2561 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0535280100)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC151379/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12589026/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Proc.%20Natl.%20Acad.%20Sci.%20USA&title=Ends-out,%20or%20replacement,%20gene%20targeting%20in%20Drosophila&author=W.%20J.%20Gong&author=K.%20G.%20Golic&volume=100&publication_year=2003&pages=2556-2561&pmid=12589026&doi=10.1073/pnas.0535280100&)\]
15.  Gruenbaum Y., Margalit A., Goldman R. D., Shumaker D. K., Wilson K. L. (2005). The nuclear lamina comes of age. _Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol._ 6, 21-31 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm1550)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15688064/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat.%20Rev.%20Mol.%20Cell%20Biol.&title=The%20nuclear%20lamina%20comes%20of%20age&author=Y.%20Gruenbaum&author=A.%20Margalit&author=R.%20D.%20Goldman&author=D.%20K.%20Shumaker&author=K.%20L.%20Wilson&volume=6&publication_year=2005&pages=21-31&pmid=15688064&doi=10.1038/nrm1550&)\]
16.  Guo Y., Jangi S., Welte M. A. (2005). Organelle-specific control of intracellular transport: distinctly targeted isoforms of the regulator Klar. _Mol. Biol. Cell_ 16, 1406-1416 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.E04-10-0920)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC551502/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15647372/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol.%20Biol.%20Cell&title=Organelle-specific%20control%20of%20intracellular%20transport:%20distinctly%20targeted%20isoforms%20of%20the%20regulator%20Klar&author=Y.%20Guo&author=S.%20Jangi&author=M.%20A.%20Welte&volume=16&publication_year=2005&pages=1406-1416&pmid=15647372&doi=10.1091/mbc.E04-10-0920&)\]
17.  Hagan I., Yanagida M. (1995). The product of the spindle formation gene sad1+ associates with the fission yeast spindle pole body and is essential for viability. _J. Cell Biol._ 129, 1033-1047 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.129.4.1033)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2120497/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7744953/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Cell%20Biol.&title=The%20product%20of%20the%20spindle%20formation%20gene%20sad1+%20associates%20with%20the%20fission%20yeast%20spindle%20pole%20body%20and%20is%20essential%20for%20viability&author=I.%20Hagan&author=M.%20Yanagida&volume=129&publication_year=1995&pages=1033-1047&pmid=7744953&doi=10.1083/jcb.129.4.1033&)\]
18.  Hicks J. L., Deng W. M., Rogat A. D., Miller K. G., Bownes M. (1999). Class VI unconventional myosin is required for spermatogenesis in Drosophila. _Mol. Biol. Cell_ 10, 4341-4353 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.10.12.4341)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC25762/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10588662/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol.%20Biol.%20Cell&title=Class%20VI%20unconventional%20myosin%20is%20required%20for%20spermatogenesis%20in%20Drosophila&author=J.%20L.%20Hicks&author=W.%20M.%20Deng&author=A.%20D.%20Rogat&author=K.%20G.%20Miller&author=M.%20Bownes&volume=10&publication_year=1999&pages=4341-4353&pmid=10588662&doi=10.1091/mbc.10.12.4341&)\]
19.  Hodzic D. M., Yeater D. B., Bengtsson L., Otto H., Stahl P. D. (2004). Sun2 is a novel mammalian inner nuclear membrane protein. _J. Biol. Chem._ 279, 25805-25812 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M313157200)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15082709/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Biol.%20Chem.&title=Sun2%20is%20a%20novel%20mammalian%20inner%20nuclear%20membrane%20protein&author=D.%20M.%20Hodzic&author=D.%20B.%20Yeater&author=L.%20Bengtsson&author=H.%20Otto&author=P.%20D.%20Stahl&volume=279&publication_year=2004&pages=25805-25812&pmid=15082709&doi=10.1074/jbc.M313157200&)\]
20.  Huh J. R., Vernooy S. Y., Yu H., Yan N., Shi Y., Guo M., Hay B. A. (2004). Multiple apoptotic caspase cascades are required in nonapoptotic roles for _Drosophila_ spermatid individualization. _PLoS Biol._ 2, E15 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.0020015)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC300883/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14737191/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20Biol.&title=Multiple%20apoptotic%20caspase%20cascades%20are%20required%20in%20nonapoptotic%20roles%20for%20Drosophila%20spermatid%20individualization&author=J.%20R.%20Huh&author=S.%20Y.%20Vernooy&author=H.%20Yu&author=N.%20Yan&author=Y.%20Shi&volume=2&publication_year=2004&pages=E15&pmid=14737191&doi=10.1371/journal.pbio.0020015&)\]
21.  Jinguji Y., Ishikawa H. (1990). An osmium-ferricyanide staining method for the intercellular space in the small intestinal epithelium. _J. Electron Microsc. (Tokyo)_ 39, 59-62 \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1694215/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Electron%20Microsc.%20\(Tokyo\)&title=An%20osmium-ferricyanide%20staining%20method%20for%20the%20intercellular%20space%20in%20the%20small%20intestinal%20epithelium&author=Y.%20Jinguji&author=H.%20Ishikawa&volume=39&publication_year=1990&pages=59-62&pmid=1694215&)\]
22.  Kennedy C., Sebire K., de Kretser D. M., O' Bryan M. K. (2004). Human sperm associated antigen (SPAG4) is a potential cancer marker. _Cell Tissue Res._ 315, 279-283 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00441-003-0821-2)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14614621/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell%20Tissue%20Res.&title=Human%20sperm%20associated%20antigen%20\(SPAG4\)%20is%20a%20potential%20cancer%20marker&author=C.%20Kennedy&author=K.%20Sebire&author=D.%20M.%20de%20Kretser&author=M.%20K.%20O%27%20Bryan&volume=315&publication_year=2004&pages=279-283&pmid=14614621&doi=10.1007/s00441-003-0821-2&)\]
23.  Ketema M., Wilhelmsen K., Kuikman I., Janssen H., Hodzic D., Sonnenberg A. (2007). Requirements for the localization of nesprin-3 at the nuclear envelope and its interaction with plectin. _J. Cell Sci._ 120, 3384-3394 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.014191)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17881500/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Cell%20Sci.&title=Requirements%20for%20the%20localization%20of%20nesprin-3%20at%20the%20nuclear%20envelope%20and%20its%20interaction%20with%20plectin&author=M.%20Ketema&author=K.%20Wilhelmsen&author=I.%20Kuikman&author=H.%20Janssen&author=D.%20Hodzic&volume=120&publication_year=2007&pages=3384-3394&pmid=17881500&doi=10.1242/jcs.014191&)\]
24.  King M. C., Drivas T. G., Blobel G. (2008). A network of nuclear envelope membrane proteins linking centromeres to microtubules. _Cell_ 134, 427-438 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2008.06.022)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2617791/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18692466/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell&title=A%20network%20of%20nuclear%20envelope%20membrane%20proteins%20linking%20centromeres%20to%20microtubules&author=M.%20C.%20King&author=T.%20G.%20Drivas&author=G.%20Blobel&volume=134&publication_year=2008&pages=427-438&pmid=18692466&doi=10.1016/j.cell.2008.06.022&)\]
25.  Kracklauer M., Banks S. M. L., Xie X., Wu Y., Fischer J. A. (2007). Drosophila klaroid encodes a SUN domain protein required for Klarsicht localization to the nuclear envelope and nuclear migration in the eye. _Fly_ 1, 17-27 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.4161/fly.4254)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18820457/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Fly&title=Drosophila%20klaroid%20encodes%20a%20SUN%20domain%20protein%20required%20for%20Klarsicht%20localization%20to%20the%20nuclear%20envelope%20and%20nuclear%20migration%20in%20the%20eye&author=M.%20Kracklauer&author=S.%20M.%20L.%20Banks&author=X.%20Xie&author=Y.%20Wu&author=J.%20A.%20Fischer&volume=1&publication_year=2007&pages=17-27&pmid=18820457&doi=10.4161/fly.4254&)\]
26.  Li M.-G., Serr M., Newman E. A., Hays T. S. (2004). The Drosophila tctex-1 light chain is dispensable for essential cytoplasmic dynein functions but is required during spermatid differentiation. _Mol. Biol. Cell_ 15, 3005-3014 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.E04-01-0013)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC452559/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15090621/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol.%20Biol.%20Cell&title=The%20Drosophila%20tctex-1%20light%20chain%20is%20dispensable%20for%20essential%20cytoplasmic%20dynein%20functions%20but%20is%20required%20during%20spermatid%20differentiation&author=M.-G.%20Li&author=M.%20Serr&author=E.%20A.%20Newman&author=T.%20S.%20Hays&volume=15&publication_year=2004&pages=3005-3014&pmid=15090621&doi=10.1091/mbc.E04-01-0013&)\]
27.  Lin T. Y., Viswanathan S., Wood C., Wilson P. G., Wolf N., Fuller M. T. (1996). Coordinate developmental control of the meiotic cell cycle and spermatid differentiation in Drosophila males. _Development_ 122, 1331-1341 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.122.4.1331)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8620860/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Development&title=Coordinate%20developmental%20control%20of%20the%20meiotic%20cell%20cycle%20and%20spermatid%20differentiation%20in%20Drosophila%20males&author=T.%20Y.%20Lin&author=S.%20Viswanathan&author=C.%20Wood&author=P.%20G.%20Wilson&author=N.%20Wolf&volume=122&publication_year=1996&pages=1331-1341&pmid=8620860&doi=10.1242/dev.122.4.1331&)\]
28.  Liu Q., Pante N., Misteli T., Elsagga M., Crisp M., Hodzic D., Burke B., Roux K. J. (2007). Functional association of Sun1 with nuclear pore complexes. _J. Cell Biol._ 178, 785-798 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.200704108)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2064544/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17724119/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Cell%20Biol.&title=Functional%20association%20of%20Sun1%20with%20nuclear%20pore%20complexes&author=Q.%20Liu&author=N.%20Pante&author=T.%20Misteli&author=M.%20Elsagga&author=M.%20Crisp&volume=178&publication_year=2007&pages=785-798&pmid=17724119&doi=10.1083/jcb.200704108&)\]
29.  Lüke Y., Zaim H., Karakesisoglou I., Jaeger V. M., Sellin L., Lu W., Schneider M., Neumann S., Beijer A., Munck M., et al. (2008). Nesprin-2 Giant (NUANCE) maintains nuclear envelope architecture and composition in skin. _J. Cell Sci._ 121, 1887-1898 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.019075)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18477613/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Cell%20Sci.&title=Nesprin-2%20Giant%20\(NUANCE\)%20maintains%20nuclear%20envelope%20architecture%20and%20composition%20in%20skin&author=Y.%20L%C3%BCke&author=H.%20Zaim&author=I.%20Karakesisoglou&author=V.%20M.%20Jaeger&author=L.%20Sellin&volume=121&publication_year=2008&pages=1887-1898&pmid=18477613&doi=10.1242/jcs.019075&)\]
30.  Malone C. J., Fixsen W. D., Horvitz H. R., Han M. (1999). UNC-84 localizes to the nuclear envelope and is required for nuclear migration and anchoring during C. elegans development. _Development_ 126, 3171-3181 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.126.14.3171)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10375507/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Development&title=UNC-84%20localizes%20to%20the%20nuclear%20envelope%20and%20is%20required%20for%20nuclear%20migration%20and%20anchoring%20during%20C.%20elegans%20development&author=C.%20J.%20Malone&author=W.%20D.%20Fixsen&author=H.%20R.%20Horvitz&author=M.%20Han&volume=126&publication_year=1999&pages=3171-3181&pmid=10375507&doi=10.1242/dev.126.14.3171&)\]
31.  Malone C. J., Misner L., Le Bot N., Tsai M. C., Campbell J. M., Ahringer J., White J. G. (2003). The C. elegans hook protein, ZYG-12, mediates the essential attachment between the centrosome and nucleus. _Cell_ 115, 825-836 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674\(03\)00985-1)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14697201/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cell&title=The%20C.%20elegans%20hook%20protein,%20ZYG-12,%20mediates%20the%20essential%20attachment%20between%20the%20centrosome%20and%20nucleus&author=C.%20J.%20Malone&author=L.%20Misner&author=N.%20Le%20Bot&author=M.%20C.%20Tsai&author=J.%20M.%20Campbell&volume=115&publication_year=2003&pages=825-836&pmid=14697201&doi=10.1016/s0092-8674\(03\)00985-1&)\]
32.  McDonald K. (1984). Osmium ferricyanide fixation improves microfilament preservation and membrane visualization in a variety of animal cell types. _J. Ultrastruct. Res._ 86, 107-118 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0022-5320\(84\)80051-9)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/6539826/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Ultrastruct.%20Res.&title=Osmium%20ferricyanide%20fixation%20improves%20microfilament%20preservation%20and%20membrane%20visualization%20in%20a%20variety%20of%20animal%20cell%20types&author=K.%20McDonald&volume=86&publication_year=1984&pages=107-118&pmid=6539826&doi=10.1016/s0022-5320\(84\)80051-9&)\]
33.  McGee M. D., Rillo R., Anderson A. S., Starr D. A. (2006). UNC-83 IS a KASH protein required for nuclear migration and is recruited to the outer nuclear membrane by a physical interaction with the SUN protein UNC-84. _Mol. Biol. Cell_ 17, 1790-1801 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.E05-09-0894)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1415293/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16481402/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol.%20Biol.%20Cell&title=UNC-83%20IS%20a%20KASH%20protein%20required%20for%20nuclear%20migration%20and%20is%20recruited%20to%20the%20outer%20nuclear%20membrane%20by%20a%20physical%20interaction%20with%20the%20SUN%20protein%20UNC-84&author=M.%20D.%20McGee&author=R.%20Rillo&author=A.%20S.%20Anderson&author=D.%20A.%20Starr&volume=17&publication_year=2006&pages=1790-1801&pmid=16481402&doi=10.1091/mbc.E05-09-0894&)\]
34.  Mosley-Bishop K. L., Li Q., Patterson L., Fischer J. A. (1999). Molecular analysis of the klarsicht gene and its role in nuclear migration within differentiating cells of the Drosophila eye. _Curr. Biol._ 9, 1211-1220 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0960-9822\(99\)80501-6)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10556085/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr.%20Biol.&title=Molecular%20analysis%20of%20the%20klarsicht%20gene%20and%20its%20role%20in%20nuclear%20migration%20within%20differentiating%20cells%20of%20the%20Drosophila%20eye&author=K.%20L.%20Mosley-Bishop&author=Q.%20Li&author=L.%20Patterson&author=J.%20A.%20Fischer&volume=9&publication_year=1999&pages=1211-1220&pmid=10556085&doi=10.1016/s0960-9822\(99\)80501-6&)\]
35.  Muro I., Berry D. L., Huh J. R., Chen C. H., Huang H., Yoo S. J., Guo M., Baehrecke E. H., Hay B. A. (2006). The Drosophila caspase Ice is important for many apoptotic cell deaths and for spermatid individualization, a nonapoptotic process. _Development_ 133, 3305-3315 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.02495)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16887831/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Development&title=The%20Drosophila%20caspase%20Ice%20is%20important%20for%20many%20apoptotic%20cell%20deaths%20and%20for%20spermatid%20individualization,%20a%20nonapoptotic%20process&author=I.%20Muro&author=D.%20L.%20Berry&author=J.%20R.%20Huh&author=C.%20H.%20Chen&author=H.%20Huang&volume=133&publication_year=2006&pages=3305-3315&pmid=16887831&doi=10.1242/dev.02495&)\]
36.  Noguchi T., Miller K. G. (2003). A role for actin dynamics in individualization during spermatogenesis in Drosophila melanogaster. _Development_ 130, 1805-1816 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.00406)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12642486/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Development&title=A%20role%20for%20actin%20dynamics%20in%20individualization%20during%20spermatogenesis%20in%20Drosophila%20melanogaster&author=T.%20Noguchi&author=K.%20G.%20Miller&volume=130&publication_year=2003&pages=1805-1816&pmid=12642486&doi=10.1242/dev.00406&)\]
37.  Noguchi T., Lenartowska M., Rogat A. D., Frank D. J., Miller K. G. (2008). Proper cellular reorganization during Drosophila spermatid individualization depends up actin structures composed of two domains, bundles and meshwork, that are differentially regulate and have different functions. _Mol. Biol. Cell_ 19, 2363-2372 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.E07-08-0840)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2397302/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18353976/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol.%20Biol.%20Cell&title=Proper%20cellular%20reorganization%20during%20Drosophila%20spermatid%20individualization%20depends%20up%20actin%20structures%20composed%20of%20two%20domains,%20bundles%20and%20meshwork,%20that%20are%20differentially%20regulate%20and%20have%20different%20functions&author=T.%20Noguchi&author=M.%20Lenartowska&author=A.%20D.%20Rogat&author=D.%20J.%20Frank&author=K.%20G.%20Miller&volume=19&publication_year=2008&pages=2363-2372&pmid=18353976&doi=10.1091/mbc.E07-08-0840&)\]
38.  Patterson K., Molofsky A. B., Robinson C., Acosta S., Cater C., Fischer J. A. (2004). The functions of Klarsicht and nuclear lamin in developmentally regulated nuclear migrations of photoreceptor cells in the Drosophila eye. _Mol. Biol. Cell_ 15, 600-610 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.E03-06-0374)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC329262/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14617811/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Mol.%20Biol.%20Cell&title=The%20functions%20of%20Klarsicht%20and%20nuclear%20lamin%20in%20developmentally%20regulated%20nuclear%20migrations%20of%20photoreceptor%20cells%20in%20the%20Drosophila%20eye&author=K.%20Patterson&author=A.%20B.%20Molofsky&author=C.%20Robinson&author=S.%20Acosta&author=C.%20Cater&volume=15&publication_year=2004&pages=600-610&pmid=14617811&doi=10.1091/mbc.E03-06-0374&)\]
39.  Penkner A., Tang L., Novatchkova M., Ladurner M., Fridkin A., Gruenbaum Y., Schweizer D., Loidl J., Jantsch V. (2007). The nuclear envelope protein Matefin/SUN-1 is required for homologous pairing in C. elegans meiosis. _Dev. Cell_ 12, 873-885 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2007.05.004)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17543861/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Dev.%20Cell&title=The%20nuclear%20envelope%20protein%20Matefin/SUN-1%20is%20required%20for%20homologous%20pairing%20in%20C.%20elegans%20meiosis&author=A.%20Penkner&author=L.%20Tang&author=M.%20Novatchkova&author=M.%20Ladurner&author=A.%20Fridkin&volume=12&publication_year=2007&pages=873-885&pmid=17543861&doi=10.1016/j.devcel.2007.05.004&)\]
40.  Rebollo E., Llamazares S., Reina J., Gonzalez C. (2004). Contribution of noncentrosomal microtubules to spindle assembly in Drosophila spermatocytes. _PLoS Biol._ 2, E8 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.0020008)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC317275/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14758368/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=PLoS%20Biol.&title=Contribution%20of%20noncentrosomal%20microtubules%20to%20spindle%20assembly%20in%20Drosophila%20spermatocytes&author=E.%20Rebollo&author=S.%20Llamazares&author=J.%20Reina&author=C.%20Gonzalez&volume=2&publication_year=2004&pages=E8&pmid=14758368&doi=10.1371/journal.pbio.0020008&)\]
41.  Shao X., Tarnasky H. A., Lee J. P., Oko R., van der Hoorn F. A. (1999). Spag4, a novel sperm protein, binds outer dense-fiber protein Odf1 and localizes to microtubules of manchette and axoneme. _Dev. Biol._ 211, 109-123 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1006/dbio.1999.9297)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10373309/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Dev.%20Biol.&title=Spag4,%20a%20novel%20sperm%20protein,%20binds%20outer%20dense-fiber%20protein%20Odf1%20and%20localizes%20to%20microtubules%20of%20manchette%20and%20axoneme&author=X.%20Shao&author=H.%20A.%20Tarnasky&author=J.%20P.%20Lee&author=R.%20Oko&author=F.%20A.%20van%20der%20Hoorn&volume=211&publication_year=1999&pages=109-123&pmid=10373309&doi=10.1006/dbio.1999.9297&)\]
42.  Starr D. A., Han M. (2002). Role of ANC-1 in tethering nuclei to the actin cytoskeleton. _Science_ 298, 406-409 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1075119)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12169658/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Science&title=Role%20of%20ANC-1%20in%20tethering%20nuclei%20to%20the%20actin%20cytoskeleton&author=D.%20A.%20Starr&author=M.%20Han&volume=298&publication_year=2002&pages=406-409&pmid=12169658&doi=10.1126/science.1075119&)\]
43.  Starr D. A., Fischer J. A. (2005). KASH'n Karry: the KASH domain family of cargospecific cytoskeletal adaptor proteins. _BioEssays_ 27, 1136-1146 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/bies.20312)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16237665/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=BioEssays&title=KASH%27n%20Karry:%20the%20KASH%20domain%20family%20of%20cargospecific%20cytoskeletal%20adaptor%20proteins&author=D.%20A.%20Starr&author=J.%20A.%20Fischer&volume=27&publication_year=2005&pages=1136-1146&pmid=16237665&doi=10.1002/bies.20312&)\]
44.  Starr D. A., Hermann G. J., Malone C. J., Fixsen W., Priess J. R., Horvitz H. R., Han M. (2001). unc-83 encodes a novel component of the nuclear envelope and is essential for proper nuclear migration. _Development_ 128, 5039-5050 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.128.24.5039)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11748140/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Development&title=unc-83%20encodes%20a%20novel%20component%20of%20the%20nuclear%20envelope%20and%20is%20essential%20for%20proper%20nuclear%20migration&author=D.%20A.%20Starr&author=G.%20J.%20Hermann&author=C.%20J.%20Malone&author=W.%20Fixsen&author=J.%20R.%20Priess&volume=128&publication_year=2001&pages=5039-5050&pmid=11748140&doi=10.1242/dev.128.24.5039&)\]
45.  Stewart-Hutchinson P. J., Hale C. M., Wirtz D., Hodzic D. (2008). Structural requirements for the assembly of LINC complexes and their function in cellular mechanical stiffness. _Exp. Cell Res._ 314, 1892-1905 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yexcr.2008.02.022)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2562747/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18396275/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Exp.%20Cell%20Res.&title=Structural%20requirements%20for%20the%20assembly%20of%20LINC%20complexes%20and%20their%20function%20in%20cellular%20mechanical%20stiffness&author=P.%20J.%20Stewart-Hutchinson&author=C.%20M.%20Hale&author=D.%20Wirtz&author=D.%20Hodzic&volume=314&publication_year=2008&pages=1892-1905&pmid=18396275&doi=10.1016/j.yexcr.2008.02.022&)\]
46.  Texada M. J., Simonette R. A., Johnson C. B., Deery W. J., Beckingham K. M. (2008). Yuri gagarin is required for actin, tubulin and basal body functions in Drosophila spermatogenesis. _J. Cell Sci._ 121, 1926-1936 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.026559)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18477609/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Cell%20Sci.&title=Yuri%20gagarin%20is%20required%20for%20actin,%20tubulin%20and%20basal%20body%20functions%20in%20Drosophila%20spermatogenesis&author=M.%20J.%20Texada&author=R.%20A.%20Simonette&author=C.%20B.%20Johnson&author=W.%20J.%20Deery&author=K.%20M.%20Beckingham&volume=121&publication_year=2008&pages=1926-1936&pmid=18477609&doi=10.1242/jcs.026559&)\]
47.  Thummel C. S., Pirrotta V. (1992). Technical notes: new pCasper P-element vectors. _Dros. Inf. Serv._ 71, E150 \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Dros.%20Inf.%20Serv.&title=Technical%20notes:%20new%20pCasper%20P-element%20vectors&author=C.%20S.%20Thummel&author=V.%20Pirrotta&volume=71&publication_year=1992&pages=E150&)\]
48.  Tokuyasu K. T. (1974). Dynamics of spermiogenesis in Drosophila melanogaster. IV. Nuclear transformation. _J. Ultrastruct. Res._ 48, 284-303 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0022-5320\(74\)80083-3)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/4210599/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Ultrastruct.%20Res.&title=Dynamics%20of%20spermiogenesis%20in%20Drosophila%20melanogaster.%20IV.%20Nuclear%20transformation&author=K.%20T.%20Tokuyasu&volume=48&publication_year=1974&pages=284-303&pmid=4210599&doi=10.1016/s0022-5320\(74\)80083-3&)\]
49.  Tokuyasu K. T. (1975). Dynamics of spermiogenesis in Drosophila melanogaster. V. Head-tail alignment. _J. Ultrastruct. Res._ 50, 117-129 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0022-5320\(75\)90013-1)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/803563/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Ultrastruct.%20Res.&title=Dynamics%20of%20spermiogenesis%20in%20Drosophila%20melanogaster.%20V.%20Head-tail%20alignment&author=K.%20T.%20Tokuyasu&volume=50&publication_year=1975&pages=117-129&pmid=803563&doi=10.1016/s0022-5320\(75\)90013-1&)\]
50.  Tweedie S., Ashburner M., Falls K., Leyland P., McQuilton P., Marygold S., Millburn G., Osumi-Sutherland D., Schroeder A., Seal R., et al. (2009). FlyBase: enhancing Drosophila gene ontology annotations. _Nucleic Acids Res._ 37, D555-D559 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkn788)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2686450/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18948289/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nucleic%20Acids%20Res.&title=FlyBase:%20enhancing%20Drosophila%20gene%20ontology%20annotations&author=S.%20Tweedie&author=M.%20Ashburner&author=K.%20Falls&author=P.%20Leyland&author=P.%20McQuilton&volume=37&publication_year=2009&pages=D555-D559&pmid=18948289&doi=10.1093/nar/gkn788&)\]
51.  Varmark H., Llamazares S., Rebollo E., Lange B., Reina J., Schwarz H., Gonzalez C. (2007). Asterless is a centriolar protein required for centrosome function and embryo development in Drosophila. _Curr. Biol._ 17, 1735-1745 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2007.09.031)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17935995/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Curr.%20Biol.&title=Asterless%20is%20a%20centriolar%20protein%20required%20for%20centrosome%20function%20and%20embryo%20development%20in%20Drosophila&author=H.%20Varmark&author=S.%20Llamazares&author=E.%20Rebollo&author=B.%20Lange&author=J.%20Reina&volume=17&publication_year=2007&pages=1735-1745&pmid=17935995&doi=10.1016/j.cub.2007.09.031&)\]
52.  White-Cooper H., Schafer M. A., Alphey L. S., Fuller M. T. (1998). Transcriptional and post-transcriptional control mechanisms coordinate the onset of spermatid differentiation with meiosis I in Drosophila. _Development_ 125, 125-134 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.125.1.125)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9389670/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Development&title=Transcriptional%20and%20post-transcriptional%20control%20mechanisms%20coordinate%20the%20onset%20of%20spermatid%20differentiation%20with%20meiosis%20I%20in%20Drosophila&author=H.%20White-Cooper&author=M.%20A.%20Schafer&author=L.%20S.%20Alphey&author=M.%20T.%20Fuller&volume=125&publication_year=1998&pages=125-134&pmid=9389670&doi=10.1242/dev.125.1.125&)\]
53.  Wilhelmsen K., Litjens S. H., Kuikman I., Tshimbalanga N., Janssen H., van den Bout I., Raymond K., Sonnenberg A. (2005). Nesprin-3, a novel outer nuclear membrane protein, associates with the cytoskeletal linker protein plectin. _J. Cell Biol._ 171, 799-810 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.200506083)\] \[[PMC free article](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2171291/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16330710/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=J.%20Cell%20Biol.&title=Nesprin-3,%20a%20novel%20outer%20nuclear%20membrane%20protein,%20associates%20with%20the%20cytoskeletal%20linker%20protein%20plectin&author=K.%20Wilhelmsen&author=S.%20H.%20Litjens&author=I.%20Kuikman&author=N.%20Tshimbalanga&author=H.%20Janssen&volume=171&publication_year=2005&pages=799-810&pmid=16330710&doi=10.1083/jcb.200506083&)\]
54.  Wojcik E., Basto R., Serr M., Scaerou F., Karess R., Hays T. (2001). Kinetochore dynein: its dynamics and role in the transport of the Rough deal checkpoint protein. _Nat. Cell Biol._ 3, 1001-1007 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb1101-1001)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11715021/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Nat.%20Cell%20Biol.&title=Kinetochore%20dynein:%20its%20dynamics%20and%20role%20in%20the%20transport%20of%20the%20Rough%20deal%20checkpoint%20protein&author=E.%20Wojcik&author=R.%20Basto&author=M.%20Serr&author=F.%20Scaerou&author=R.%20Karess&volume=3&publication_year=2001&pages=1001-1007&pmid=11715021&doi=10.1038/ncb1101-1001&)\]
55.  Xie X., Fischer J. A. (2008). On the roles of the Drosophila KASH domain proteins MSP-300 and Klarsicht. _Fly_ 2, 1-8 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.4161/fly.6108)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18820482/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Fly&title=On%20the%20roles%20of%20the%20Drosophila%20KASH%20domain%20proteins%20MSP-300%20and%20Klarsicht&author=X.%20Xie&author=J.%20A.%20Fischer&volume=2&publication_year=2008&pages=1-8&pmid=18820482&doi=10.4161/fly.6108&)\]
56.  Xiong H., Rivero F., Euteneuer U., Mondal S., Mana-Capelli S., Larochelle D., Vogel A., Gassen B., Noegel A. A. (2008). Dictyostelium Sun-1 connects the centrosome to chromatin and ensures genome stability. _Traffic_ 9, 708-724 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0854.2008.00721.x)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18266910/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Traffic&title=Dictyostelium%20Sun-1%20connects%20the%20centrosome%20to%20chromatin%20and%20ensures%20genome%20stability&author=H.%20Xiong&author=F.%20Rivero&author=U.%20Euteneuer&author=S.%20Mondal&author=S.%20Mana-Capelli&volume=9&publication_year=2008&pages=708-724&pmid=18266910&doi=10.1111/j.1600-0854.2008.00721.x&)\]
57.  Zhang Q., Ragnauth C., Greener M. J., Shanahan C. M., Roberts R. G. (2002). The nesprins are giant actin-binding proteins, orthologous to Drosophila melanogaster muscle protein MSP-300. _Genomics_ 80, 473-481 \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12408964/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Genomics&title=The%20nesprins%20are%20giant%20actin-binding%20proteins,%20orthologous%20to%20Drosophila%20melanogaster%20muscle%20protein%20MSP-300&author=Q.%20Zhang&author=C.%20Ragnauth&author=M.%20J.%20Greener&author=C.%20M.%20Shanahan&author=R.%20G.%20Roberts&volume=80&publication_year=2002&pages=473-481&pmid=12408964&)\]
58.  Zhong L., Belote J. M. (2007). The testis-specific proteasome subunit Prosalpha6T of _D. melanogaster_ is required for individualization and nuclear maturation during spermatogenesis. _Development_ 134, 3517-3525 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.004770)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17728345/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Development&title=The%20testis-specific%20proteasome%20subunit%20Prosalpha6T%20of%20D.%20melanogaster%20is%20required%20for%20individualization%20and%20nuclear%20maturation%20during%20spermatogenesis&author=L.%20Zhong&author=J.%20M.%20Belote&volume=134&publication_year=2007&pages=3517-3525&pmid=17728345&doi=10.1242/dev.004770&)\]

## Associated Data

_This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article._

### Supplementary Materials

\[Supplementary Material\]